; Civilization II The test of Time
; Civilopedia Descriptions
; Huis Clos/Lalande 21185 Science Fiction Game
; Copyright (c) 1999 MicroProse Software/Hasbro Interactive
;

@ADVANCE_DESCRIPTIONS
;
; The index is a mapping to the rules file. The labels to the right are the entries, IN ORDER,
; that are in the rules.txt file. The number to the left is the description below that
; corresponds to the rules entry. For example, Amphibious Warfare will be the 55'th (remember,
; the list is zero based) description below beginning with @@.
; Only ONE entry per line, number MUST BE TERMINATED WITH A COMMA.
; The list must terminate with a -2. A -1 indicates no description, do not list or index.
;
@@ADVANCE_INDEX
0,			; Adaptive Farming
1,			; Allotropics
2,			; Mechanized Armor
3,			; Genetic Artistry
4,			; Aerology
5,			; Proteus Sapiens
6,			; Quantronics
7,			; Flood Prediction
8,			; Chaos Biogenics
69,			; Astronomy
10,			; Electronic Brains
11,			; Plasmatronics
12,			; Code of Trust
13,			; Forward Vectoring
14,			; Xenolinguistics
15,			; Collective Rule
16,			; Citizens' Compact
17,			; Wireless Networks
18,			; E-M Repulsion
19,			; Flying Machines
20,			; Craftsmanship
21,			; Proteocracy
22,			; Market Economy
23,			; Free Expression
24,			; Omniform Bacteria
25,			; Plasma Engines
26,			; G.En.I.E.s
27,			; Syncretic Biology
28,			; Transmutation
29,			; Arete
30,			; Circular Supports
31,			; The Great Joining
32,			; Green Attractors
33,			; Gene Tailoring
34,			; Genera Nova
35,			; Crystal Thermionics
36,			; Heteromorph RNA
37,			; The Eight-Fold Way
38,			; Humanics
39,			; Primitive Machinery
40,			; Lab Instruments
41,			; Basic Automation
42,			; Adaptive Automata
43,			; Emergent Systems
-1,			; Not Used 1
44,			; VTOL
-1,			; Not Used 2
45,			; Xenobiology
46,			; Positronic Brains
47,			; Primitive Weapons
-1,			; Not Used 3
48,			; Radioplastics
49,			; Woodworking
50,			; Biorobotics
51,			; Expedient Hierarchy
52,			; Applied Hedonics
53,			; Piracy
54,			; Merchant Marine
55,			; Psionics
56,			; Euthenics
57,			; Adaptive Eugenics
58,			; Artificial Gravity
59,			; Protoviral Warfare
60,			; Total Immunity
61,			; The Swarming Path
62,			; Pressure Vessel
63,			; Spacecraft
64,			; Frictionless Surfaces
65,			; Economy of Scale
66,			; Principles of Vanok
67,			; Prionic Stabilizers
68,			; Confederation
9,			; Hybrid Design
70,			; Edification
71,			; The Force Su'aruk
72,			; Sensing Aqueous
73,			; Unification Theory
74,			; Vastness of Purpose
75,			; Ge'sstok Mamuun
76,			; Quantum Gravitics
-1,			; Not Used 4
77,			; EarthGate
78,			; Penultimum
79,			; Disintegration
80,			; Trade Guilds
81,			; Monopole Control
82,			; Nucleonics
83,			; Solid Hydrogen
84,			; Monopolium
85,			; Xenology Studies
86,			; MonoSkin Armor
87,			; Abaryonic Matter
88,			; Hyperfusion
89,			; FTL Drive
90,			; Transfer Gate
91,			; Plasma Chamber
92,			; D-116 Capacitance
93,			; Singularity Physics
94,			; Wormhole Genesis
95,			; Wormhole Control
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Adaptive Farming
It goes without saying that a supply of food is important to the continuing stability of any civilization. Though it is possible to eke out a meager living by growing crops brought from the home planet in various nutrient broths, the better solution is to adapt those food crops to the local soils and conditions. Beginning with small successes in adaptive horticulture (experimenting with nonessential plants), the early colonists gradually discovered methods and means for adapting their invaluable seed crops to thrive in the Funestian ecosystem. This not only guaranteed their long term survival on the new planet, but also significantly reduced the various costs of large scale food production.

@@Allotropics
The development of biologically allotropic organisms--viable creatures able to exist in multiple forms without significantly changing their internal structure--was a watershed moment in the progress of advanced genetic engineering. This new science not only provided us with a new realm of military units and a greater understanding of morphic energies, but it was at this juncture that the possibility of taking our species intentionally through the next step in our evolution became more than just a philosopher's dream. If we could recreate the legendary griffins, there seemed to be nothing to prevent us from engineering ourselves into intelligent, allomorphic beings--proteus sapiens, shape-shifters.

@@Mechanized Armor
War machines are one legacy of our home world's technology that many would have liked to have seen forgotten. Unfortunately, on an unexplored and hostile planet, we do not have the luxury of pacifism. Even some of the other nations that have sprung up from surviving groups from our own ship have proven to be less than trustworthy. Skirmishes can escalate rapidly into protracted wars, and we must be able to defend our cities and, if necessary, pursue offensive options to ensure the security of our territory and citizens. New developments in automation, control systems, and weaponry have made our war machines quite different from what we might once have meant by the term 'mechanized armor'. The first generation of mechanized robotic war machines (MRWMs) surpass anything that ever trod the battleground on our home world.

@@Genetic Artistry
Over time, the sciences that have allowed government funded labs and large corporations to tamper with the genetic code and create different and sometimes improved transgenic versions of existing organisms have gradually become more and more accessible to the common citizen. As the equipment required has gotten smaller and the necessary investment come within the budget of the average household, it was perhaps inevitable that our species creative spirit would make a showing. Nowadays, the design and generation of new, odd, and often beautiful creatures and plants is an enjoyable hobby, a common pastime, and for some a new art form. New museums, galleries, and even a group of genetic collectors have sprung up seemingly overnight. As an added bonus, the government labs can often recruit the brightest stars of this new medium to design useful organisms for use throughout the whole empire.

@@Aerology
The atmosphere surrounds us, supplies us with oxygen, and protects us from the vacuum and radiations of space. It also produces weather, which sometimes threatens us with extinction. Aerology is the name for a broad category of atmospheric sciences. Understanding the patterns of climate and the resulting local weather on our new planet is not only necessary to efficient agriculture, but also vital to the survival of our little community. Among other things, it allows us to predict where violent weather is likely, so that we do not build there, and gives us the schedule of rainy and dry seasons on which to base our agricultural calendar.

@@Proteus Sapiens
The creation of the new species, proteus sapiens, was the start of a biological upheaval as great as the ancient change from neandertal to modern humans. Among other revolutionary shifts, this marked the absolute and permanent merging of the intelligent species in this system. Though each nation retained its independent identity, it became impossible to tell the citizens of one from the others simply on the basis of biology. Over time, this common resemblance helped to encourage peaceful relations between civilizations, but--a sad lesson history teaches us--being part of the same species is not enough to prevent warfare when there are religious differences and political ambitions involved.

@@Quantronics
Just as electronics is the science of engineering devices based on the movement of electrons and positronics depends similarly on controlling their antimatter counterpart, positrons, the field of quantronics has at its source the fundamental "physical" unit of the quantum universe--the quantron. Though the activities of each one are essentially unpredictable, quantrons in large numbers do follow certain statistically determined behavioral patterns. As such, they are vulnerable to manipulation, though not on the order of detail that electrons are. Devices built around quantronic theory give new meaning to the concept of modifying the environment. In fact, some of the larger and more powerful among them are perfectly capable of rearranging chunks of reality the size of small cities. This technology promises to lead to incredibly dangerous weapons, but in the short term, most of its applications have been in the field of computing, not warfare.

@@Flood Prediction
In every clime, there are underlying causes and patterns behind the weather. Though it can take some time and a great deal of meticulous record-keeping and cataloging effort, understanding the local meteorological phenomena is a boon to any settlement. Especially in areas prone to regular flooding, as seems to be the case over most of Funestis, it is futile to build bridges or roads near any body of running water until you know the schedule and the strength of the deluges. Then, you can use your knowledge to predict floods and avoid the resultant destruction and casualties.

@@Chaos Biogenics
The science of biogenics concerns itself with the creation of biological organisms. It dates its beginning from the time an unidentified researcher in syncretic biology accidentally discovered a large, unstable protein molecule that turned out to be the long-sought biogen--a sort of biological philosophers stone. When this semi-mythical, hypothetical protein suddenly became real, it opened the floodgates to a whole new realm of biology. Scientist found that they had the fundamental force behind all of biology in their hands. Of course, it wasn't that simple. The instability in the biogen conferred strong chaotic properties on all biogenic energies and materials. The creations of this science, though often powerful and sometimes wonderful, are always unpredictable. Nothing good comes without risk, and in chaos biogenics, that is doubly true.

@@Hybrid Design
The human technology of biorobotics was a frail and barbaric precursor to true integration of biological and technlogical elements into the same organism. Hybrid design was the next giant step toward the final goal of merging organic parts from any species with whatever mechanical devices seemed fitting to the needs and purposes of the being in question. Robust, microminiaturized plasmatronic control systems enabled the different bits to work together seamlessly, and genetic predesign of organisms prevented rejection. There was some public backlash when these techniques debuted, but as is usual, time eased the fears of many, and success helped to assuage and remove the stubborn objections of even the most strident critics.

@@Electronic Brains
We are all familiar with the stories of the magnificent computers that helped the pilots to control and navigate the original mother ship to this system from our home planet. In essence, these were devices capable of performing repetitive arithmetic and logical functions far more quickly than an organic brain. What they lacked in complexity, they made up for in brute speed. The electronic brains developed since landing here are not quite the same thing, though we put them to many similar uses--navigation, control of complex and tedious processes, and mathematical calculation. These are true connection machines, perfectly capable of building and retaining logical pathways that were neither programmed into them nor foreseen by their builders. Though no one suggests that these devices are conscious or even advanced enough to be considered minds, they are able to learn, and their capabilities truly pass far beyond those of the legendary computers of old.

@@Plasmatronics
The manipulation of plasma for control and communication purposes was one of those sciences that began with an accident. The pilot of a Mechanized Robotic War Machine (MRWM), in the midst of a pitched battle, found himself in a dead vehicle. All systems were operational, except that his power line had been severed. Stuck without power, the pilot noticed that his imaging system was turning itself off and on repeatedly. Hunting down the cause, he found that a broken plasma conduit was tapping against one of the imaging relays, intermittently providing power. Thinking fast, the clever pilot tapped into his weapons plasma source for electrical power and reanimated his MRWM. As a result, research engineers began providing every vessel with a plasma power backup. They eventually used the plasmatronic systems as the primary, after they added a positronic brain to provide the necessary control feedback processors.

@@Code of Trust
A frontier is a rough place. Without some sort of law, even the most well intentioned group of colonists can degenerate into violent anarchy and pandemonium within a remarkably short period of time. Taking a cue from history, most successful early civilizations developed a code of conduct--written or unwritten--that provided some stability and what future theorists would call a "primitive social contract" of sorts. Examples from human history include the legendary "Law of the West" and the Gentleman's Code. This set of rules gives a society an agreed-upon basis on which to build. Without this set of behaviors, a community finds it difficult to realize the bonds of trust necessary for the construction of a true civilization.

@@Forward Vectoring
Since the first era of space flight, what humans call the "Hohmann orbit" has been recognized as the most efficient ballistic method of traveling between planets in the same system, as long as both of the planets orbit in or near the local ecliptic. Developments in the understanding of the nature of gravity and insights into the pervasive fields that comprise and thus mold the form of the universe resulted in an engineering opportunity that was not at first apparent. Forward vectoring is a complex (to the lay person) system of gravitational and field equations. One solution of these equations allows for the possibility of more efficient--in fact, practically instantaneous--translation of a vessel from one planet to another. The equipment required is bulky, and the trip is hard on the vessel; only the most heavily armored war machines seem able to survive intact.

@@Xenolinguistics
To communicate with a completely alien species involves more than just deciphering a spoken language (assuming they even use verbal communication). The most basic concepts spring from the way an organism senses the world around it. Anatomy, the structure of the nervous system, types and locations of sensory organs, and many other details determine the methods and forms of communication a species will eventually come to use. To comprehend the language, one must understand the organism and have some sense of its social history. Without intimate knowledge, it's all just gibberish, and any attempt at translation is doomed to failure in a sea of unproven speculation. Once this primary barrier has been breached and contact is made, information floods through and diplomacy can begin.

@@Collective Rule
Collective rule is an idea taken from the study of social insects, both here on Funestis and on our home world, and made possible by modern information and communication systems. In its simplest form, the collective concept posits a system of government in which resources, production facilities, and authority are the shared property of the population. Individual property still exists, but power over the functions of government is shared. Responsibility and labor are shared, as well, so that each citizen realizes equal duty and equal benefit. Ideally, such a system precludes the existence of a ruler. However, experience has shown the need for an analog to the queen of a hive. Though this "queen" has little authority over the day to day function of the collective, she controls and is responsible for both relations with other civilizations and the overall direction of the society as a whole.

@@Citizens' Compact
Throughout history, the members of every civil society have lived by a set of unwritten rules that allowed large groups of citizens to coexist without constant aggravation and unchecked violence. These rules, whether referred to as etiquette, a code of conduct, cultural conformity, or a social contract, were without question a useful, if sometimes constricting, tool of civilization. The Citizen's Compact is no more or less than any of these codes of civil behavior. The only difference is that the Compact is written document, distributed and proliferated throughout the population, enforced by the will of the common people, and subject to emendation by vote of the general citizenry. It is an interesting social experiment, and one that has its advantages.

@@Wireless Networks
The distribution of information is vital for any large, complex society to function efficiently and progress beyond the primitive industrial stage of development. Back on our home planet, we had over time created a world wide network of wires, cables, fibers, and other systems for relaying transmissions. Our first struggling attempts at a planetary info-net were based on this existing infrastructure. On Funestis, of course, the early settlers had no such preexisting system, and they certainly did not have the resources to create a global communications infrastructure from scratch. Without resorting to satellites (which were in their infancy at any rate), our hardy ancestors investigated the characteristics of the Funestian ionosphere and discovered a way to bounce narrowly focused signals great distances without massive hardware requirements. Using this technique (along with a lot of other reinvented communications technology), they set up wireless networks for information distribution throughout civilization.

@@E-M Repulsion
Although our species has been using various forms of electromagnetic energy for hundreds of years, we still have not exhausted its potential utility. The development of electromagnetic (E-M) repulsion field theory is just one example of the kind of surprises science can provide. The E-M repulsion field is, in essence, a wall of energy that prohibits passage of both material objects and most forms of energy. Though this is an oversimplification, it correctly defines the EMR field's primary function--defense. We can build EMR fields of any size, provided we have the capacity to generate enough energy to maintain it. Military units can carry portable field generators to set up when stationed in one place for a long time. Support units can build more permanent force field structures, and we can even surround an entire city with a giant field of repulsive force. When worn as a personal shield, the EMR field makes armor and weapons unnecessary, and repulsion of the ground below the unit's feet allows faster movement.

@@Flying Machines
The idea of flight has tantalized all beings since their earliest days. Studies regarding the possibility of reproducing the flying machines we know from the home world date back to the first days after the landing. Various engineers and inventors with leisure time experimented successfully with gliders, and experiments with the rare bits of found and recreated technology met with limited success. The key to success in powered flight on Funestis was not the reinvention of the internal combustion engine, as one might think, but an extension of the new technology of controlled electromagnetic repulsion fields. This new era of flight advanced rapidly from its starting point, primarily due to the memories of a time when our species ruled the skies of the planet of our birth.

@@Craftsmanship
It's not enough to just do the job that needs to be done and move on. When your goal is to rebuild a civilization from the scraps left over after a star ship crash, you need to learn from every project and pass that knowledge on to future workers. In the early history of our home world, skilled craftspeople set up a system of apprenticeships to just that end. Techniques and skills drawn from trial and error and personal experience were passed from the expert to the students, who then became the next generation of experts. In this way, the knowledge base grew and only little information was lost over time. The reinvention of this system of craftsmanship proved vital in our early days on Funestis, both as a system of data retention and as a strong thread in the social fabric of the early colonies.

@@Proteocracy
A protean being is a flexible being, and protean citizens deserve a government that is as adaptable and efficient as they themselves are. This is the source of the Proteocratic way. A proteocracy is a system of rule in which modern methods of mass communication--two-way communications--allow every citizen to assert a great deal of control over the actions of the government, both directly and through representatives. Citizens gather often in their favorite virtual forum, and each has an opportunity to speak and be heard, and to vote on issues affecting the community and the nation. Gathering large populations into even a virtual forum can be impractical, so there is sometimes a need to rely on elected representatives to carry a community's views to the ruling managers. Among other benefits, the protean system results in great personal and economic freedom for every citizen, which has proven to contribute vastly to the economic well being and productivity of the nation as a whole. Perhaps the only bane is that leaders tend to become disposable when the population at large has the ability to run things themselves.

@@Market Economy
The idea of basing a nation's economy on the "invisible hand" of supply and demand is certainly of questionable wisdom. After all, our history is replete with examples of greed and corruption ruining any system that does not have built-in safeguards against abuse. Nevertheless, this sort of market-based economic system is good enough for the purposes of expanding the productivity of our small, growing empire. In time, we will find something better. For now, however, the antiquated ideas of Adam Smith are an expedient, if less than perfect, temporary solution.

@@Free Expression
Throughout history, citizens have valued the freedom to speak their minds without fear of punishment. Unfortunately, that freedom has often been considered a luxury that those in command could not afford. In the early days of our time on Funestis, the free expression of opinions and conflicting ideas was not always welcome. Times were hard, and minority voices were often ignored or stifled in the interest of common vision and stable leadership structures. Thankfully, those days seem to be over, and with suitable amendments to the Citizens' Compact, the expression of ideas and opinions, in whatever form they might take, has become every being's protected right. Artistic endeavors are among the most notable beneficiaries of this program, and our whole society gains from that.

@@Omniform Bacteria
From the time heteromorphic RNA became a reality, biological theorists knew that it was possible to create microorganisms capable of changing their form--adapting to fit their situation. More than just a normal physical adjustment, however, the process an omniform microbe would go through could be a substantial rearrangement of its entire structure--the microscopic equivalent of metamorphosis, or shape-changing. Actually creating one of these organisms, however, had to wait for progress in automation. Even the best laboratory staff can only do so much when working by hand. Automated labs brought about great gains in biological research back on our home world, and the same was true on Funestis. The scientists who generated the first omniform microorganisms wisely chose to use a common bacterium with no known connection to any disease. Their caution was rewarded when the resulting omniform bacterium proved unkillable; it immediately metamorphosed to resist any attempt to destroy it.

@@Plasma Engines
Based on discoveries made while studying the ancient alien plasma chamber found on a platform orbiting Funestis, engineers soon developed a great number of devices that channeled the energies of controlled plasmas into useful applications. One of the most successful of these were the plasma engines that powered vehicles and vessels across the globe and into space. The availability of reliable plasma power freed spaceship designers from the constraints of the effective, but limited, electromagnetic propulsion, liquid-fueled rockets, and solid-fueled rockets of the past. The ancient chamber design included a startling level of miniaturization, which allowed engine designers to minimize the mass requirements of the fuel storage systems, thereby increasing the potential payload and range of vessels using these engines. As has been true historically of most improvements in transportation technology, the development of plasma engines led to a new era of exploration and colonization.

@@G.En.I.E.s
The Genetically Engineered Integrated Environment (GEnIE) was the pinnacle of pre-syncretic biological engineering. After decades of intense study and millions of hours of creative work in genetic manipulation, environmental planning, and ecosystem design, researchers finally realized success in mating several disciplines into one bold project. A GEnIE is, essentially, an entire contained ecosystem created by biological engineers. Every detail--every organism, every chemical reaction, every enzymatic pathway, and so on--was designed, tested, and put into place intentionally. The complexity of the task is breathtaking and, to anyone not experienced in the field, overwhelming. Nevertheless, the success of the project was undeniable. The beautiful, relaxing GEnIE parks that grace every truly civilized city are a lasting reminder of the potential for science to benefit civilization.

@@Syncretic Biology
If the different biological systems of humans and non-humans can work side by side in the same organism, as the successes in hybrid design have proven, what prevents the two biologies from coexisting completely? That was the question posed by the researchers who created the field of syncretics. These visionary thinkers believed that it was not only possible but desirable to merge the distinctly different cell lines of all the sentient species in this system. It was not an easy course they charted for themselves, which is why we celebrate their success. Though the meshing of biologies did not, as some had predicted, bring about instant world peace, over time the several species became one. If nothing else, this gave all of us a common purpose--to return to the world of human origin and share this gift with our ancestors.

@@Transmutation
Transmutation--the changing of an object into a completely different form--began as a sub-specialty of advanced electromagnetic science. The limited early successes--making gold from lead and so forth--provided ongoing funding. When living things proved incapable of surviving transformation, however, biology began to creep into the field. Pretty soon, genetic engineering took over, and transmutation as we now know it emerged. Although the enormous amounts of equipment and energy necessary to perform transmutation is more often than not restrictive and prevents common use, this remarkable process can be used in municipal practice to produce useful raw materials from scrap and garbage.

@@Arete
Fighting ability is not the only requirement for becoming a professional warrior. The collective term 'arete' includes all the rest. Though the word has come to mean "courage" alone, that is in fact only a portion of its original meaning. Arete, as practiced by the warriors of our home world, involves all of the habits and disciplines necessary to living a warrior's life--organization in dealing with one's personal belongings and activities, cleanliness of body, focus of mind, care for one's weapons and armor. These are the things that make a fighter into a warrior and a warrior into a professional. Recreating the code of arete here on Funestis was one of the first steps toward rebuilding a noble civilization that could reach for the stars again.

@@Circular Supports
Now that we have discovered them, circular supports (the humans point to them and make a sound like "weelz") seem like the sort of thing that any intelligent species would invent at the very dawn of civilization. It is a testament to the bizarre vagaries of random chance that we did not do so while still on our home world. Used as the basis of a vehicle, these round, flattened objects allow much faster travel than our traditional sledge system, and for a greatly lessened cost of production. Three rolling supports seem to result in a stable configuration, but scientists have experimented with combinations of one, two, four, and even six or eight supports.

@@The Great Joining
Syncretic biology, which essentially combined all living things into a single great theory of organics, resulted in a revolution in the cultural sciences and philosophies. One aspect of this revolution was the development of an effective method of creating and controlling a mass mind strong enough to encompass the entire population of a nation. This fascinating process unites the entire civilization into a single consciousness. The power of this group mind is incredible, and it is even capable of calling up and dominating the frightening Blue Willie plant creatures. The productivity, military might, and data collection potential of a mass mind is awesome, and there are no problems with insurrection or strikes. Perhaps the biggest downfall of this collected consciousness is that the bliss of connection seems to dull creativity and suppress inventive thought.

@@Green Attractors
Chaos theory predicts that in many chaotic systems, there will be "attractors"--mathematical "areas" of relative stability in the unpredictable behavior of the system. In the field of chaos biogenics, it took quite some time--and the discovery of allotropics--before scientists finally found the attractors they had hoped existed. These so-called "green" attractors gave biogenic engineers much greater mastery over their creations. Since the public debut of the green attractor equations, not a single biochaotic generator has gone out of control.

@@Gene Tailoring
In the last years before colony ships began to leave our home world, the art of tinkering with the genetic makeup of various organisms began to seem commonplace. Foods derived from engineered plants were regularly available, and no one protested the advances in designer vaccines and antibiotics. Unfortunately, all access to that useful science was cut off by the loss of the majority of our medical database when we crashed on Funestis. In the rough times after that, rebuilding the infrastructure necessary to conduct advanced biological research was one of our civilization's highest priorities. With the availability of laboratory instruments not unlike those the original colonists remembered, that day finally came. Tailoring genes was the first step in a long journey through advances in genetic science; it was the crucial first step that made everything that followed possible. Nowadays, when everyone simply takes for granted that new beings are designed before they are born, it is easy to forget that it was not always like that--we did not always have control over our own futures.

@@Genera Nova
Genera nova--Latin for "new classes"--is the commonly recognized name for a revolution in the genetic sciences and engineering disciplines. Certainly observers of science could have predicted (and some did predict) that the skills developed for modification of organisms and genetic artistry would eventually reach a point at which it would be possible to actually create not only new species, but entirely new kinds of living things. This was a watershed moment for biogenicists (as they came to be called) across the planet. After this, it was only a matter of time before the secrets of alien biology were revealed, and the possibility of linking everything into one, syncretic biology became more than just an idiosyncratic dream.

@@Crystal Thermionics
Materials brought to incandescence (through heating, for example) can emit ions. These ions are referred to as "thermions" because of their origin. The branch of physics that deals with phenomena related to these particular ions is thermionics. Investigation into the properties of delerium-116 crystals and their unusual energy capacitance have led to a surprising result. Although we still do not completely understand how the anomalous crystal lattice generates the capacitance, our researchers have found that delerium also acts as a manipulable-phase conductor of thermionic currents. Without going into too much technical detail, this means that delerium-116 crystals can be used to build micro-miniature power and control circuits in nearly every plasma-based application currently extant or on the drawing board.

@@Heteromorph RNA
Access to a microgravity environment (space) gave researchers in the field of genetic transmutation an opportunity they had been eagerly anticipating. Advanced theories suggested the possibility of an unheard of type of replicating molecular structure, a form of RNA capable of changing its structure--and thus its physical properties--on demand. The necessary engineering could not be done under even a mild gravity; the intermediate molecular structures were so fragile and the manipulation so delicate that the experiments had to be done in space by skilled microsurgeons. Early failures nearly doomed the project, but finally success came only days before funding for the project was to be cancelled. The results of this breakthrough work are evident in every facet of society even today. Transplant technology went through a revolution, and the benefits brought about by the unleashed power of morphic energy are difficult to overestimate.

@@The Eight-Fold Way
In a primitive, rebuilding culture such as we were in the early days on Funestis, applied sciences naturally take precedence. There are few if any excess resources for investigations into fields of theory that show little potential for producing immediate, substantial gains. Later in our development, however, we earned for ourselves the luxury of basic science--and its long term benefits. One of these was the intensive study of the way the physical universe works. This broad field encompasses everything from the motions of subatomic particles up through the life cycles of star clusters and galaxies. Though some short sighted philosophers have at times begrudged the funding set aside for researchers in the Eight-Fold Way, the enrichment our civilization has gained from this study has always far exceeded the cost.

@@Humanics
Humanics is, simply put, the study of human nature. As it turns out, the more we know about ourselves, the better we are able to both govern our passions and turn them toward positive goals. An early key in this enterprise was the development of the so-called "theory of equal consideration"--which was thought to herald the end of destructive forms of intra-species competition. Of course, it wasn't quite that simple, but the economic and social gains that resulted from the brief acceptance this theory enjoyed cannot be denied.

@@Primitive Machinery
Early in our stay on this planet, recreating the devices that we had taken for granted on our home world was a massive undertaking. Weaving plant fibers into cloth, smelting ores and rolling the resulting metals, firing glass, and many more vital, everyday activities required massive amounts of work and time when done by hand. Therefore, reinventing all of the "primitive" machines that had performed these chores at home was one of the top priorities for the original surviving colonists.

@@Lab Instruments
The reinvention of laboratory instrumentation--not only beakers and bunsen burners, but also centrifuges, electrophoresis devices, and such--was another of the early, bold steps toward recreating the civilization we knew before leaving the home planet and crashing on Funestis. As it turned out, this was a seminal stage in our development. Since regaining the ability to perform advanced scientific investigations, what was once a small community of refugees has blossomed rapidly into a full-fledged empire.

@@Basic Automation
The creation of machines to increase the efficiency of manufacturing processes was a natural outgrowth of our reinvention of machinery. The later recreation of computers and their refinement into electronic brains took the possibilities for automation one step further. Computer-controlled machines were designed to perform repetitive or dangerous tasks more quickly than organic beings, but it wasn't until the availability of portable plasma energy sources that the construction and maintenance of large numbers of truly independent automated robots became feasible. After the development of the early mechanized robotic war machines (MRWMs), it was a short step to automated maintenance robots for domestic and industrial applications. These devices, though primitive compared to later designs, brought about a great improvement in the standard of living for all citizens.

@@Adaptive Automata
We cannot know what progress has been made on the home world in our absence, but whenever our science surpasses what is remembered of the technology there, it is cause for celebration. Automata--robots--that learn and adapt to new situations had not been perfected before our star ship was launched. The ability to independently reconfigure both programming and physical structure to match the needs of a new environment or situation allows the new generation of automata incredible flexibility in all aspects of their work. Industrial and agricultural applications have seen the greatest benefit, but the entertainment value of adaptable robots has not gone unexplored. The military advantages, in the form of new MRMW designs, are clear.

@@Emergent Systems
Once automata became adaptable, researchers and robot designers defined the next big step as inculcating what they call "emergence" into these machines. Essentially, the newest breed of robots has the ability to not only learn and adapt, but to design and build the next generation of automata and pass their experiences and adaptations on to those robots--their offspring. The dividing line between a series of automata and an organic species has never been more blurred. The long term consequences of giving our creations this sort of power over their own future are unclear, but our philosophers concur (though not unanimously) that it is the most ethical path to follow. Having once given these thinking beings control over the destiny of their kind, it would be cruel and immoral to take it away again. Whatever the long term brings, in the short term, this development has been an unmitigated boon to both the military and civilian sectors.

@@VTOL
The technology required for Vertical Take-Off and Landing (VTOL) of spacecraft and in-atmosphere flying machines was well developed on the home world, but came at some cost on Funestis. This planet rotates on its axis more swiftly than our world of origin, which makes horizontal spacecraft launches more energy efficient and, therefore, more attractive in terms of budgeting. The precision gained though VTOL, however, was well worth the sacrifice in fuel efficiency. The venerable Shuttle alone, with its long service lifetime, justified any research and development spending for VTOL technology.

@@Xenobiology
Though it is true that some scientists had been studying the biology of the alien life forms we encountered since landing on Funestis, it is also the case that they made very little progress until we better understood the underpinnings of all life. Armed with the expertise gained from decades of genetic engineering projects and the knowledge of the incredible adaptability of heteromorphic RNA (and its precursor molecules and antecedent enzyme and protein products), researchers were finally fully prepared to investigate alien biology in all its oddity. In addition to enhancing our ability to comprehend these strange beings, the study of xenobiology also brought us close to a vitally important breakthrough; understanding their biology gave us the keys that eventually allowed us to decipher their bizarre language.

@@Positronic Brains
It is not necessarily the case that a computing device based on the manipulation of positrons should be more efficient or more powerful than one based on electronics. However, in practice it has always proven to be the case that positronic brains are more effective computers than their electronic counterparts. No theory explains why this is so, but there is plenty of speculation. A positron is the antimatter counterpart of an electron. Simply put, it is a positively charged particle that, in a typical atom of antimatter, is found orbiting a nucleus made up of antiprotons and neutrons. Most of the speculative theories revolve around the interaction between the positron and the predominantly normal matter universe around it. Whatever the underlying cause, once the positronic circuits are successfully insulated from contact with the surrounding environment (to avoid catastrophic particle annihilation events), the brain works fully three times as fast as a typical electronic brain of the same design and size.

@@Primitive Weapons
Soon after the landing, it became quite clear that we were to be stranded on this planet for the foreseeable future. With this is mind, our leaders decided that the power in the few weapons we managed to salvage would best be used for life support, and that defense would have to come from other means. One of the very first items of business, therefore, was to reinvent the more effective early weapons used by our forebears--the longbow, crossbow, axe, spear, and so on. Without these, the human presence on Funestis would have been short lived.

@@Radioplastics
Long ago on Earth, the militaries of a few nations experimented with forms of armor and ammunition that used "depleted uranium" to add density for strength or penetration capability. This depleted uranium was actually U-238 hexafluoride that had been isotopically purified through the removal of most of the U-235 (normally by gaseous diffusion). Although this eliminated the reactivity of the substance, it did not get rid of its natural radioactivity. It is for this reason that the newly developed Isotopically Purified Uranium-238 HexaFluoride (IPUHF) plastic compounds are commonly referred to as radioplastics. The successful integration of IPUHF fibers into the structure of high-strength plastic body armor increased its durability--and the lifetime of the solider inside--dramatically. Of course, there has been a significant upswing in the number of tumors and leukemias reported by longtime veterans, but advances in genetic engineering techniques seem to promise a solution to that problem in near future generations.

@@Woodworking
Even before the advent of recorded history, humans have worked in wood. From primitive carving with a sharpened stone up through the exquisite inlaid furniture of the Italian Renaissance, local artisans of all regions have used the most basic materials at hand to create useful and beautiful pieces. Through the centuries, workers in wood have developed many skills for getting the intended result out of a particular type or shape of wood, and they have passed on their learned expertise to apprentices, students, and other interested amateurs. Unfortunately, none of the potential colonists chosen as crew members for the interstellar mission had any of these skills. Thus, the human settlers on Funestis have had to reinvent the craft using local woody plants and their imperfect memories of what was possible back on Earth.

@@Biorobotics
Grafting robotic elements into human bodies was a fertile subject for speculation long before our ancestors left the Earth. As predicted, when the merger of biology with technology became a reality, the overwhelming majority of applications for this technique were in the military sphere. Though many citizens chose to have failed organs or other unwanted body parts replaced with machine elements, most folks preferred the purely biological alternatives--lab grown transplant tissue and such. Thus, it was only in situations that required extra strength and durability--the military--that what had once been called "cyborgs" became commonplace.

@@Expedient Hierarchy
Soon after regrouping, the survivors of the expedition realized that, though democratic rule was all well and good in theory, it was not effective in the current dire situation. Bowing to the needs of expedience, they quickly moved to adopt the hierarchical structure they had become accustomed to onboard the star ship--with each person assigned to specific duties and the chain of command clearly demarcated. This hierarchy was dynastic; rule of the nation passed to the highest ranked inferior when the current superior officer died or chose to retire. Though it resulted in a greater efficiency and productivity, hierarchical rule often became burdensome and unwieldy as each civilization grew too large for such simple structures.

@@Applied Hedonics
Hedonics--the study of human pleasure and displeasure--has been a priority for humans since the genesis of the species, though it was only in the twentieth century that someone put a name to this field. Though some primitive religious institutions seemed bent on preventing people from pursuing this basic element of human nature, it goes without saying that individual humans continued their research despite the lack of official sanction. On Funestis, the development of a formalized theory of hedonics led quickly to multiple applications and soon after to an "applied" branch of hedonic science. Keeping people happy has never been easier, although--as is true of any honest science--the hedonicists readily admit that there are flaws and much room for improvement in the current theories.

@@Piracy
Throughout human history, wherever there has been a system of commerce, an independent society of thieves has grown up around it to take advantage of the vulnerabilities therein. Rather than allowing privateerism to develop of itself, we have chosen to study it and bring it to maturity under government auspice. Brought to heel as a tool of the state, the resourceful individuals who might otherwise become villains serve our interests as Corsairs.

@@Merchant Marine
The naval vessels of a nation that pursue commerce, and the crews of those ships, are often considered the backbone of international trade. On Earth, the worldwide system of sea trade developed over centuries, through wars and exploration. On the planet Funestis, however, the merchant marine was an intentional construction, developed and built by the various governments to aid the early progress of an intercontinental trade network. In the process, the need became clear for a diplomatic presence capable of carrying on negotiations. Thus, both commerce and diplomacy were served by the same tool--as has often been the case throughout human history.

@@Psionics
Interest in heightening the mental powers has been endemic in human culture since at least the dawn of recorded myth. God, goddesses, and monsters were frequently imbued with telepathic powers, and many believed that normal humans have the potential for this sort of capability. Though most of these purported abilities are clearly nothing more than hopeful delusion, developments in the psionic sciences have brought about an amplification of sorts that allows some semblance of what has been called "mind control" over others. It is a subtle and unreliable force, but there is no longer any doubt of its existence. Though it strikes many of us as odd that the non-human beings we have encountered seem to have neither abilities nor interest in this area of study, perhaps we should simply count that fact as one among our few natural advantages and leave it at that.

@@Euthenics
Humans have been practicing euthenics for millennia; it's just the accurate name for the process of bettering the condition of humans through the modification and manipulation of their surroundings and environment. Some would say that this is one of the activities that separates humans from the beasts of the Earth, though others would argue that many "beasts" modify their environments quite effectively. In any case, humans are the only known Earth species to have researched and created formalized theories of euthenic science. Of course, as is the case with any system of information, this knowledge can be put to less than ethical uses. That risk is, perhaps, the price we pay for progress.

@@Adaptive Eugenics
The term 'eugenics' has been used as the excuse for some of the most cold-hearted and despicable acts of racism and ethnic intolerance in human history. The concepts behind it have been so often misunderstood and twisted to evil ends that few leaders would admit to supporting any project with the word in the title. Thankfully, the applied science of adaptive eugenics shares none of its namesake's animal ruthlessness. The goal of adaptive eugenics is to improve the human species, but not through the harsh and ineffective methods of earlier times. Rather, this program encourages voluntary biorobotic adaptation for any citizen who feels that it is in the interests of his or her future descendents to be augmented in such a way. Though most of the adaptations are heritable, nearly all are also reversible if the offspring in question disagree with their ancestor's reasoning. In this way, the human species can muddle along at its own pace, always in the general direction of becoming a better organism.

@@Artificial Gravity
Taking advantage of the odd properties of the delerium-116 crystals, engineers have managed to fulfill one of the oldest dreams of the human race--control over the force of gravity. Though our understanding of the force is still incomplete, this development gives us incredible power. We can now provide gravity in our space vessels, build units that overcome gravity without massive engines, and use the tension (stressor fields) between conflicting gravitational fields to generate energy. Our researchers now contend that if we only had knowledge of a theory that unified the known primary forces of physics--what they call a grand unified theory (GUT) or unification theory--we could develop a system for controlling gravity at the quantum level.

@@Protoviral Warfare
Research into the genetics of contagion, viral mutation and evolution, and variable structure (semi-protean) RNA resulted in an unfortunate discovery. With the development of engineered, hyper-contagious, self-adapting, protoviral strains and the appropriate organic delivery systems (vectors), unethical warfare took a giant step forward into the future--and many see it as quite a bleak future. The only bright spot of hope is that the invention of these protoviral weapons has spurred investigations into creating organisms with hyperadaptive immune systems to combat the spread of these and other biological weapons.

@@Total Immunity
Throughout human history, our species has been ravaged by diseases and physical infirmities. Aging has always been a process of slow decline, and we have been subject to poisoning by substances too numerous to mention. We have made much progress over the years in this never-ending fight to rid mankind of these curses, but with the discovery of protoviruses, we finally began to make great leaps. The protoviruses are incredibly adaptable, able to change form so as to protect themselves from nearly any threatening environmental factor. The Total Immunity Program (TIP) was an attempt to give human beings the same ability. Though it was only a limited success, the concept proved viable and was later incorporated into the design of the Proteus Sapiens species. In essence, the TIP provided a way to permanently prevent disease, poisoning, and the infirmities of age in a being. (The treated beings do age, but they don't show the usual symptoms; they simply go on as strong as ever until the minute they keel over.) Unfortunately, the beings so treated tend to suffer intelligence deficits as a side effect of the process.

@@The Swarming Path
Industrial methods and theories, when applied in a social context, are a double-edged sword. On the positive side, they can bring about a number of interesting applications to art and cultural development. The questionable aspects are all spiritual and philosophic. When The Swarming Path was first described in the media, the youth in many towns and larger population centers formed gang-like "will groups" that meshed the minds of their members into a barely controlled pastiche of passions, whims, and urges. Naturally, these "beings" tended toward violent behavior. Though the group mind techniques were eventually perfected and led to an interesting form of government, these early experiments were nothing more than bizarre failures.

@@Pressure Vessel
Though we cannot communicate directly with the species that calls itself "human" beings, we can learn from watching them and their devices. It is abundantly clear that technology on their home world followed a similar path as ours, but the differences are telling. One example is the pressure vessel, a simple device for using artificially generated gas pressure as a source of energy. Even the highly inefficient burning of wood or other hydrocarbon fuels to heat water can generate enough pressure to drive a vehicle weighing several tons. We have also been able to route the escaping gasses through vibrating reeds to produce sounds. In this way, a single being can imitate the speech of many types of organism, which facilitates communication within our empire and with those other offspring of our original colony ship.

@@Spacecraft
From the time of our uncontrolled landing on Funestis, returning to space has been perhaps the most sought after dream of every citizen. Though the technology and industrial base needed for travelling back to our home planet is still far out of reach, this tiny step in that direction gives us hope. The redevelopment of launch capabilities and spaceworthy vessels should also allow us to explore the orbiting platforms our telescopes have shown us. Whether these are simply remnants of our mother ship or actually, as many have surmised, relics of a long-ago alien presence in this system, the platforms should offer technology and raw materials to accelerate our rise toward the stars. If necessary, they also provide a high frontier from which to launch attacks on our enemies.

@@Frictionless Surfaces
Friction, the tendency of material objects to resist moving when in contact with one another, has always been the limiting factor on the speed of ground transportation. The development of special surfaces that minimize and--in some cases--completely eliminate friction caused by motion was a significant step forward for mass transportation systems, and resulted in the invention of the first slideways. Using these, a nation can transport goods, raw materials, people, and military forces from place to place--even across a continent--with a negligible expenditure of energy. Though removing the friction from the travel surface results in greater efficiency, disastrous early accidents proved that it is important not to remove friction from the system entirely; otherwise, it is impossible to brake or turn, which can cause some problems.

@@Economy of Scale
In the decades after the development of the scale economy, when we finally became able to communicate with the human nations, we found that they had discovered this particular application long ago, on their home planet. They called it by various names--"mass production", "assembly line", "supply and demand", "efficiency in volume", and others--which led our philosophers to conclude, rightly as it turned out, that the humans had actually come to the same effective conclusion by several different routes. Whatever the route, it is an inescapable fact that the introduction of industrial methods and scales caused a thorough reshuffling of our civilization's manufacturing processes--for the better, although the pollutant problem it introduced was certainly irritating.

@@Principles of Vanok
All wise warriors recognize that technological progress requires adaptation in our theories of warfare. Building on the foundation provided by the code of arete, the warrior-philosopher Vanok worked long and diligently to derive the Nine Principles of modern tactics. These rules, when adhered to correctly, give a fighter the tools to survive and succeed in the realm of technological warfare, but not only that. Vanok's brilliance was that his principles are themselves adaptable to new developments. The nine provide a code that can serve well into the future, until the invention of some weapon or tactic that Vanok's genius could not foresee and plan for.

@@Prionic Stabilizers
The name of the prion, a tiny biological agent first discovered by the humans before they left Earth, is derived from the term 'proteinaceous infectious particle'. This odd pathogen is made up entirely of protein; unlike other disease-causing microorganisms, it has no detectable genetic material. Though prions have been implicated in several neurodegenerative diseases, that is immaterial in this field. Chaos theory predicts the existence of attractors in any chaotic system--such as chaos biogenics--and allows the existence of stabilizers. Speculating that the common property of the biogen and the prion--both are entirely proteinaceous--might presage a functional connection, researchers investigated the possible link. As it turned out, the prion can act as a stabilizer in nearly any chaotic biogenic system. This property seems to rely on the prion's resistance to ultraviolet radiation, but the specifics have as yet eluded our science teams.

@@Confederation
A confederation has much in common with the republics of Earth history. This system of government is a collection of semi-independent states, in each of which the citizens select both a local leader and representatives to carry their opinions and desires to the overall government. The citizens of a confederacy generally enjoy a great deal of personal and political freedom. Although this is, by and large, an effective system, the pursuit of personal agendas by states' representatives can interfere with their intended function (representing the views of their constituents). This type of corruption is fairly common in a confederated government, and has proven the downfall of many an empire.

@@Astronomy
On the home world, astronomy began as it no doubt has elsewhere--observation and recording of regular celestial movements for the purposes of timekeeping, navigation, and scheduling the planting and harvest. For us on our new home, it is just as important that we learn to predict the changes in the night skies. Just as the exploration and exploitation of new planets in our home system provided great impetus to our forebears, so we must expand onto whatever worlds await us in this system. To stop growing is to wither, and to wither is to eventually die. History tells us that any empire that once stops expanding rarely regains the spirit to begin growing again. We must not fall into the trap of complacency.

@@Edification
Our philosophers tell us that there comes a time in the lifeline of every intelligent species when it confronts its limitations and either overcomes them or perishes. Communication with the human civilizations gave us an outside view of ourselves, and that precipitated a philosophical crisis of epic proportions. The solution was a grand undertaking, nothing less than a complete, species-wide reconciliation effort. The Edification Project brought every citizen face to face with reality and the future, and determining our place in it provided a clarity of purpose, a true sense of self, and a delicacy of being unmatched in the long history of thought. This truly remarkable result solidified our community and national unity, which allowed us to face the other civilizations in this system eye to eye, on equal terms.

@@The Force Su'aruk
Deep investigation into the properties of plasmatronic materials drew the attention of philosophers to anomalies that did not match the prevailing theories. Though the physical descriptions of plasmatronic behavior did not disagree with experimental evidence, the extant equations were not philosophically satisfying in their rigor and aesthetics. Embarking on their own researches, a group of aestheticians found that there was a previously undescribed force lurking behind the principles of plasmatronics. Su'aruk, their name for this essential and universal force, serves to realign the equations of plasma properties and restores the grace and symmetry we have come to expect from descriptions of universal truths.

@@Sensing Aqueous
The electromagnetic waves that surround and infiltrate all things do not except the undersea realm from their purview. Through experiments with contained vessels, our philosophers have found that these waves carry information about the physical objects they pass through and collide with as they travel. By emitting specially configured energetic waves and listening to the stories told by those that return, our naval warriors can remotely sense both the invisible terrain beneath the sea and any enemy vessels lurking there. This submarine mapping ability allows us to build ships that travel under the waves, rather than above them, which gives us a tactical advantage.

@@Unification Theory
The forces and energies that comprise the physical universe are surprisingly few and simple. All this wonderful complexity springs from the interactions of a few basic properties of space-time and the energy-matter that inhabits it. This theory encompasses all of these rules in a symmetrical, aesthetically balanced framework. The unification theory is incomplete in a minor way, but even so, it provides the best description of the way the universe works that we are currently capable of producing. The most renowned philosophers speculate that if we could gain an understanding of methods for manipulating gravity, we could then develop theories to describe the most fundamental workings of the universe with a precision that is currently impossible.

@@Vastness of Purpose
We had only begun expanding our nation into the space near our new home when a few rogue philosophers developed the theory of Vastness of Purpose. Though it was widely condemned as a narrow-minded and parochial worldview, this way of thinking provided citizens with a reason for enthusiastic nationalism--which was of great help to the ambitious politicians of the time. The theory that our species (and only ours) was destined to colonize every habitable planet and platform in this entire system, mated with the idea that only we were deserving of it, gave unethical leaders a lever they could use to ignite the intolerant passions of the less educated members of the populace. Though it resulted in a short-term boost in efforts to colonize and exploit near space, the negative side effects on the civility of society eventually proved to be the most lingering consequences of this unsound theory.

@@Ge'sstok Mamuun
Even though the development of the protean individual has rendered us physically indistinguishable from the humans, there are still differences in patterns of thought that have not been completely extinguished. Many individuals feel that it is in the interests of our culture to protect and nurture these differences. To that end, our philosopher-scientists have delved into ancient lore and myth preserved from our original home world and discovered the legendary G'esstok Mamuun--the mystical source of all philosophy and, some would argue, our racial birthright. Though this knowledge offers little in the way of material gain and only mediocre military advantage, the emotional and psychological benefits are beyond price.

@@Quantum Gravitics
A quantum theory of gravity long eluded cosmologists and physicists. With the knowledge gained in generating artificial gravitational fields and the tenets of the (incomplete) unification theory, theorists had the foundations they needed to make the next logical step. Quantum gravitics is the field of engineering applications that grew from the understanding of gravity at the quantum level, which unveiled the underlying forces of our universe (and confirmed that there are almost assuredly other "universes" in existence).

@@EarthGate
The EarthGate is the culmination of everything our civilizations have stood for and dreamed of since the two original colony ships crash landed in this once-alien system of planets. Though our human and non-human ancestors, over the centuries, joined into the one true Protean species and came to feel at home here, our true homes are always the faraway stars. Returning our entire population to either home world would, of course, be absurd. Sending a delegation to reestablish contact will suffice to fulfill the dream. Once we are in regular communication with the Earth, we can add our science to theirs and theirs to ours--bringing them the benefits of protean biology and existence and us the ability to find a contact the other home world. In time, we will establish a permanent, two-way system of wormhole gates, so that any citizen can make the pilgrimage to either planet. The EarthGate is the first step in our new journey--a journey that leads back to Earth and a glorious future.

@@Penultimum
Long experience has taught wise scientists to avoid making sweeping, final statements. Thus, the most advanced result of materials engineering to date, the most stable substance ever to exist in the known universe, and (according to current theory) the strongest material it is possible to create, is called Penultimum--"not quite the ultimate". This novel composite retains its superlative hardness and durability through a remarkable range of extreme temperatures, shrugs off the effects of electromagnetic energies, gravitational and tidal stresses, and even the theoretical phase transition and cascade event required for faster than light (FTL) travel.

@@Disintegration
Intense study in the fields of singularity physics and mechanics led researchers inescapably up the ethically suspect path of disintegration devices. Disintegration--the complete, instantaneous annihilation of both target and weapon--is the single most morally questionable weapons technology to arise since the fumbling, early days of nuclear fission and fusion on our far-off home planet. Unlike those primitive nuclear energy sources, however, a disintegrator has no possible alternative purpose; it is a tool of destruction, nothing else. Though perhaps, someday, we will find a use for these devices, it is the fervent hope of most citizens that they never be developed or built, much less used.

@@Trade Guilds
One of the oldest and most widespread social institutions is the exchange of goods--trade. Originally and in the time soon after our landing in this system, most trade consisted of barter, in which two traders would exchange goods with one another. The widespread practice of trade soon led to the need for some sort of regulation of quality. Borrowing from history, civilizations on Funestis set up guilds--membership organizations dedicated to maintaining professional standards in the manufacture and sale of goods and services. Guilds serve as both a source of licensing to ensure quality and, through censure and expulsion, an agency of enforcement. Not least, a guild often kept a library of data--a storehouse of wealth on this new world.

@@Monopole Control
The discovery of naturally occurring concentrations of magnetic monopoles on Naumachia was a moment of reckoning for scientists. The theories current at that time allowed for the existence of these odd entities, but did not suggest that they would occur in large quantities or on the surface of any world. It quickly became obvious that these "natural" lodes of monopoles had somehow been created by the advanced technologies of the ancient inhabitants of these planets--the HaGibborim. Developments in quantum gravitics supplied the tools needed to manipulate these bizarre magnetic anomalies. Experiments and experience gradually enabled researchers to exercise some control over monopoles. Though still in its infancy, monopole control technology resulted in the extraordinarily strong hull of the Bulldog vessel, which could theoretically survive short trips through the outer layers of a star.

@@Nucleonics
Physics defines the major subatomic particles that exist naturally in an atomic nucleus as nucleons. The common nucleons include protons, neutrons, and their antimatter counterparts, antiprotons and antineutrons. Just as electronics is the science and engineering involving electrons, the field of nucleonics has at its core the study and manipulation of nucleons. Though this field is similar in many ways to electronics, nucleonics engineers must work against (and with) the strong interaction--the short range, powerful force that holds the atomic nucleus together--rather than the weak interaction, which guides the movement of electrons. The energies involved in nucleonics are several orders of magnitude greater than those necessary in electronics or positronics, and the resulting control over the physical environment is also much more impressive.

@@Solid Hydrogen
Every element exists in many phases; the most common and well known are the gas, liquid, and solid phases. For some elements, certain phases are more common than others. For example, hydrogen, the lightest element, is found most often in nature in its gaseous phase. That is primarily because the temperatures required for hydrogen to undergo phase transitions--condense into a liquid or freeze into a solid phase--are so extremely low. Despite the technical barriers, scientists and engineers have long speculated on the properties of solid hydrogen; theory suggests that it should be extremely strong, a superfluid solid, and a superconductor of both heat and electricity. For many reasons, this substance would be quite useful in research, engineering, and in military applications.

@@Monopolium
Long before the actual development of monopolium, it was theoretically possible to create physical structures using only magnetic monopoles as building materials. There were many problems to overcome along the way to this ultra-dense, frighteningly strong substance. Among the most intractable was the fact that monopoles are extremely massive, so that any large group of them tends to have a huge gravitational effect. For example, a lump of monopoles with a radius of just over one meter, when unrestricted by artificially induced gravitational control fields, collapses into a black hole. The potential gains outweighed the costs, however, and engineers worked diligently to produce methods of confining, controlling, and restricting monopoles to create a useful substance out of them. The result is the nearly impenetrable, ultra-strong, hyper-energetic monopolium, a remarkable material (for small applications) and an extraordinarily powerful explosive.

@@Xenology Studies
Since the time our intrepid explorers first crash landed in this alien system, study of the strange and often wonderful organisms and cultures we've found here has been a driving force in the progress of ideas and inventions that have sustained and improved our civilization. New breakthroughs in understanding have become an almost daily occurrence in this advanced era, and further insights and discoveries will continue to drive knowledge well into the future.

@@MonoSkin Armor
Monopolium is an incredible substance, but its utility is limited by its extreme properties. For that reason, the development of comfortable body armor made up of monopolium is all the more impressive. The MonoSkin suit is perhaps the thinnest armor ever devised; it is only one monopole thick. This minimizes the mass (and therefore the weight) of the armor and helps prevent it from collapsing and crushing the wearer. However, even at this microscopic thickness, each suit still masses almost as much as the planet Mars. The key technology is a distributed network of microminiaturized gravity controls built into every square millimeter of the armor. These effectively neutralize the suit's dangerous instability, and there's a useful side effect. Not only is the MonoSkin armor virtually impenetrable, but the gravity controllers allow the mass effects to be directed through specially designed boots. The wearer of this armor can cause a localized earthquake simply by stomping a foot.

@@Abaryonic Matter
Throughout the explored volume of space, all natural matter and antimatter is made up of atoms. The nucleus of every atom is composed of either protons and neutrons or antiprotons and antineutrons. These nuclear particles (nucleons) are all categorized as baryons--particles with half integral spin, affected by the strong interaction, made up of 3 quarks, and having a neutral color charge. Combining the superconductivity and hypermagnetism of solid hydrogen with the tensile strength and other odd properties of monopolium, we are capable of generating magnetic fields powerful enough to force certain combinations of non-baryon particles into close enough proximity that the strong interaction takes over and fuses them into an abaryonic nucleus. Add electrons or positrons (depending on whether you're working with matter or antimatter particles), and you have an atom containing no baryons. There are as yet no applications for this completely new type of matter, but its existence is testament to the power of our technology.

@@Hyperfusion
As was proven by science even before we left our home planet, no material object can accelerate until it surpasses the speed of light (c). Reliable theories make it abundantly clear that that would require infinite thrust, which is not available. As a stepping stone to the theoretical possibility of faster than light (FTL) travel, researchers in the field of universal field dynamics developed the concept of the hyperfusion coil. This odd device, which exists only partly in the dimensions we are capable of sensing directly, has the potential to generate a "field cascade episode" that would (in theory) be able to wrap itself around a large object--a vessel--and propel it through a phase transition to superluminal velocity. The drawback at present is simply that we have no reliable way to power this awe-inspiring cascade reaction. The energies and particles required are beyond the capabilities of even our most powerful particle injectors.

@@FTL Drive
Developing a power source that could initiate the field cascade event potential of the hyperfusion coil has been a priority for science ever since the equations that proved the viability of the coil process were described. Finally, a tireless researcher hit on the idea of the abaryonic chamber--a micro-miniature particle accelerator that catalyzes high-energy reactions between normal, baryon-based matter and some of the recently created non-baryonic elements. When linked to a hyperfusion coil, the output from this device (reaction products and energies from a truly reality-warping event) is enough to provoke the predicted field cascade episode. The first prototype proved to be a runaway success--literally. It simply vanished from the test bed and could not be retrieved by any means. This pointed out the need for isolator currents to prevent the field cascade from taking effect prematurely. After several remarkably expensive tests (and the loss of more than a few unmanned test vessels), the concept proved out, and a dream of centuries--a faster than light (FTL) starship drive--became a reality.

@@Transfer Gate
The technology required for returning to Earth is now firmly within our grasp. Building from the wormhole creation and control techniques of the long gone HaGibborim, we have discovered how to generate a one-way wormhole transportation system. In experiments with short-range destinations, we have sent uncrewed probes through the transfer gate. The probes have experienced only minimal passage of time, yet telescopic verification has proved that they traveled several light-hours or even light-days distance. It is only a matter of time and experience before we refine our control enough to be able to place the other end of a transfer gate near the Earth (without accidentally damaging any of the known bodies in the Solar system). Then, we can send a mission to reestablish contact with our ancestors and our home world.

@@Plasma Chamber
The creation of plasmas--highly ionized gases--is not difficult. What proved impossible until the discovery of the relic plasma chamber was generating a plasma hot enough and dense enough for use in energy storage and weapons applications, then confining that violent plasma in a useful, portable, safe form. The device found on the platform orbiting Funestis was tiny--no larger than a shotgun shell--but contained both a secure plasma storage chamber and a reliable, high precision release valve. We cannot know for certain, but it seems to have been designed for use in a hand held tool or weapon of some sort. Study of the ancient alien apparatus resulted in a leap forward in our understanding of plasma mechanics, which eventually led to the development of the plasma engines that powered interplanetary vessels for many years.

@@D-116 Capacitance
The delerium-116 crystal is an oddity by any physicist's or chemist's standards. By some trick of its lattice structure, even a tiny sample of delerium is capable of storing an awe-inspiring amount of energy. Given the proper tools, we can then extract that energy at will--in whatever amounts and at whatever speed we choose. The delerium-116 crystal is, in effect, a nearly perfect capacitor. It is probable that we would never have discovered this unique property had a survey team not found an ancient alien artifact on the planet Naumachia. (Similar relics have been picked up all over that world, so it's a safe bet that someone would have found one sooner or later.) Even without fully understanding the underlying physical or chemical processes, however, we can imitate the design of the alien devices discovered on Naumachia and modify the gadgets to accommodate them to different applications.

@@Singularity Physics
A singularity is a point in our universe where the known physical laws cease to apply, normally because some characteristic--mass, energy, gravity, or some such--approaches or crosses the limit of our understanding. The nature of singularities has until now prohibited any investigation into their properties, but recent discoveries made while examining the debris left when one of the HaGibborim devices was destroyed have changed that. Evidently, some of the ancient aliens' machines somehow used captive singularities as a power source. The lessons learned from the study of this complex gadgetry have opened up whole new realms of physics.

@@Wormhole Genesis
The creation of a wormhole--a "tunnel" between two points in space that does not cross the intervening distance--is a monumental task. The masses and forces involved are almost beyond our capacity to understand, yet we know from our study of the remains of the ancient HaGibborim warfare device that it is possible. In fact, physical theory allows for several methods of linking distant places through non-linear shortcuts. Unfortunately, most of those involve manipulating black holes or infinite masses, and the resulting wormholes would not allow vessels to pass through or crews to survive the trip. Perhaps it is not necessary to say so, but our engineers refuse to make the attempt until we know how to control the wormhole once it has been created. After all, the forces required are more than enough to destroy the entire system should we somehow lose control of the process.

@@Wormhole Control
As it turns out, creating a wormhole is the easy part. Keeping it open, controlling its spin and cavity diameter, and predicting the tidal forces in and around the transport aperture are much more difficult. Then there's the minor issue of making sure that the other end of the transport curve is where you want it to be--near the Earth. Thankfully, it will not be necessary to develop all of these techniques on our own. (Frankly, the concepts are so complex that the chances are good none of us would be alive to see the day we succeeded.) Advanced engineering technologies culled from the wreckage of one of the giant HaGibborim guardian units on Nona have saved us untold years of scientific effort. For that, we must thank all of the military personnel who gave their lives in the attempt to overcome that ancient and powerful device.


@IMPROVEMENT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@IMPROVEMENT_INDEX
-1,			; Nothing
2,			; Capital
11,			; Garrison
19,			; Hydroponic Reserve
29,			; Orrery
15,			; Guild Library
24,			; Laboratory
31,			; Satellite Uplink
4,			; City Shields
23,			; Justice Network
22,			; Investment House
18,			; Hologaming Arcade
20,			; Infomatrix
30,			; Priodulcificator
27,			; Mutandis Museum
38,			; Workshop
36,			; Transmogrifier
28,			; Nucleon Shield
34,			; Sphacelatorium
3,			; Carbonarium
26,			; Morphic Generator
1,			; Biochaotic Generator
8,			; Emergence Center
25,			; M.A.I.D.S.
17,			; Harvester
13,			; GEnIE Park
5,			; Collapsatron Q
10,			; Fulmine Ring
37,			; Tsunamines
14,			; Gravitic Generator
0,			; Algae Farm
6,			; Deep Dome
21,			; Instaporter
7,			; Dopplegarage
16,			; Harbor Town
33,			; Spaceport
35,			; Superstructure
9,			; FTL Drive Element
32,			; Ship's Facility
12,			; Gene Census
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Algae Farm
Algae is one of the simplest living things in existence, and one of the oldest on most worlds. Long before a planet develops animals, plants, or even multi-celled organisms, blue-green algae appear, invent photosynthesis, and flourish--adding oxygen to the atmosphere in the process and, in many ways, paving the way for more complex forms of life. As the biosphere progresses, algae become a source of food for uncounted larger species. The algae farm takes advantage of this primordial organism's usefulness. Grown in giant vats, crops of algae can be processed into food for citizens and used as feed for other edible organisms.

@@Biochaotic Generator
The development of the biochaotic generator is a success story with ironic tragedies built in. When biomathematicians solved the fundamental equations of chaos biogenic theory, the solutions pointed to a way of extracting vast amounts of energy from the mutational potential locked in every living cell. While this power is extremely useful for industrial and civil purposes, the obliteration of several labs--and the entire ecosystem for several square miles around every one--showed that the biochaotic energies involved were quite difficult to keep under control. The later discovery of attractors in Frazier biocomplexity geometries ("green attractors") allowed the creation of a feedback leash for this reaction, removing the threat of a wild hypermutational chain entering the local ecosystem.

@@Capital
When the survivors emerged from whatever broken pieces of starship they had ridden to the ground, the first priority was assuring their own long term survival. Later, it fell to the more foresighted among them to organize their ragtag communities into cities. Government quickly became structured and formalized, and the leader of the first city established headquarters from which the business of running the new empire was conducted. In many cases, these buildings also served as the living quarters of the leader. As cities grew prosperous, these facilities expanded into large campuses. The richly adorned, imposing buildings are a source of civic pride, and they help to reinforce the aura of power surrounding the leader.

@@Carbonarium
Long ago, intelligent civilizations realized that power generation via chemical combustion--burning carbon-based materials such as fossil fuels--is not only brutally inefficient, but also so dangerous to the global environment as to be considered barbaric and unethical by any advanced species. Nevertheless, it is also recognized as one of the necessary early steps toward building an industrialized society that is capable of supporting the scientific effort needed to advance to civilized methods of power generation. The Carbonarium is the most efficient combustion facility we are currently able to build; it does generate an unfortunate amount of particulate pollution, but much of a city's garbage and unwanted organisms can be fed into its indiscriminate ovens, thereby offsetting, to some extent, the filth it produces.

@@City Shields
From the earliest days of civilization, cities have constructed walls to protect themselves against raiders, bandits, and enemy attacks. These walls often represented a major investment in both time and materials, and required years to complete and constant repairs to maintain their strength and integrity. With the discovery of E-M repulsion field technology, we can protect a city in the same way by erecting two concentric force fields surrounding the city. When active, these shields repel the very atoms of any unit attempting to approach, slowing the attackers (if not halting them completely), and giving the defenders a significant advantage. Why two concentric rings? This strategy is borrowed from ancient times. A unit that somehow breaches the first shield is then trapped in an area with no hiding places and no cover--a killing field--between the two repulsion fields.

@@Collapsatron Q
The development of the Vastly Parallel Quantronic Wave Function Collapse Computing Device (VaPQWaFCoCoDe), commonly known as the Collapsatron Q, began decades before our original mother ship was launched from the home world. "Quantum computing" was the old term for the primitive--and entirely theoretical--wave function collapse calculation schemes. It was not until the fortuitous development of quantronic theory (and the resulting control over Bose-Einstein condensates the size of small buildings) that the possibility of computing via the collapse of an artificially sustained, multi-tiered quantum wave function became technically feasible--an exercise for engineers, rather than mathematical theorists.

@@Deep Dome
Every land based species on record has longed to expand into the seas. While there is no shortage of living space on Funestis or in this system, there are abundant natural resources under the oceans that await exploitation. Taking advantage of these resources is only a matter of technological advancement. The deep dome is one giant step in the right direction. This completely automated, fully robotic undersea mining and processing plant is designed to withstand pressures and environments that would destroy any known biological organism. Once set in place, the deep dome (named for the rarely used, domed and pressurized maintenance area) starts churning out industrially useful materiel at a dependable rate, ignoring weather, political upheavals, and dangerous organisms equally.

@@Dopplegarage
History teaches us many lessons. One of the most often ignored is that in a population under a form of government that allows personal freedom, many citizens become unhappy when their loved ones are stationed in military units based far from home, especially in wartime. There have always been many ways to alleviate this unrest--many of them morally questionable--and modern medical technology has provided us with one more. In the local dopplegarage, any citizen can have a biologically perfect duplicate of the person they miss--a clone, in essence--grown in only a few weeks time. Though the duplicate has no mind to speak of, it seems to provide enough sense of the person's presence to prevent publicly significant unhappiness. There are ethical problems with this arrangement, of course, but in times of war, what enterprise is not suspect?

@@Emergence Center
The discovery of emergent systems has made it possible for us to build computing devices and robots that not only learn and adapt, but are also capable of inventing new characteristics and abilities for themselves (and their "offspring") when needed. Their existence is a tremendous potential boon to any city, but without an Emergence Center, much of that potential is wasted. This advanced agency (originally conceived and designed by a robot!) has many functions. It's a massive data storage facility, a central location (a home, if you will) for all of the emergent computers in a city, and a place where mobile ECs (robots) can go for both maintenance downloads and the fast-paced stimulation that only interaction with other ECs can provide, which has proved to be necessary to their "sanity". All told, this results in a tremendous increase in the amount of data income produced by a city.

@@FTL Drive Element
The drive system is at the heart of any space-going vessel; without it, the ship is just another object following the dictates of inertia. Of course, a faster-than-light drive is not a typical engine. A material object (a ship) cannot simply accelerate until it surpasses the speed of light--c. Relativity theory makes it clear that that would require infinite thrust. Rather, an FTL drive must circumvent the cosmic speed limit to reach superluminal velocities. The abaryonic hyperfusion drive does just that. In each Abaryonic Chamber, a micro-miniature particle accelerator catalyzes high-energy reactions between normal, baryon-based matter and some of the recently created non-baryonic elements. The reaction products and energies derived from this reality-warping event cause a field cascade episode in the Hyperfusion Coil. When the isolator currents are disengaged, the field cascade engulfs the entire ship, forcing the space around it through a phase transition and, effectively, propelling it beyond c.

@@Fulmine Ring
The Fulmine Ring disrupts enemy air attacks, giving defending units an advantage. This installation is best described in an excerpt from Bemoth Tog's article, "New Tools for the Defenders":
"I had never seen the alien-inspired plasma chamber before, and now I faced endless, dedicated banks of them. Conversation was impossible in that vast cavern, every sound drowned out by the hum of power straining to be freed. We took positions in the shielded viewing port near the top of the tower for the test. Even behind the shields, my hair stood on tiptoe. I don't mind admitting that the sound and the fury when they unleashed the lightning had me wishing I was cowering under a bed somewhere. Words like 'awe-inspiring' and 'magnificent' don't even begin to measure up to that experience. This was the angry hand of some ancient god brushing my shoulder. When the lightning formed into the circle around the city--what the engineers call the fulmine ring--I breathed a hearty sigh of relief, glad that this elemental force was on our side. Then I went home to change my underwear."

@@Garrison
Confronted with a completely unknown, undoubtedly dangerous, and possibly hostile new world, we do not have the luxury of pacifism. Although war is not desirable, it is important that even the most peaceful society be prepared for the possibility. This installation provides a permanent facility where military units can be quartered, repaired, refueled, and generally kept in readiness. History teaches that when warring factions are closely matched in technology and manpower, battles are won by the better trained force. Therefore, these facilities also offer the benefits of a military academy, established for the purpose of training our defense personnel in the latest methods, tactics, and technology.

@@Gene Census
This ongoing project is a truly city-wide effort. All possible productivity, both materiel and work-hours, is dedicated to gathering data. Genetic samples are taken from the citizens, any animals and plants that can be found, the local environment, and any other source a citizen can imagine. Record-keeping, classification, and hunting down ever more facts become the primary industry for everyone not assigned to vital duties (such as food production and medical care). The census has been called "the triumph of taxonomy" by some, and it's as accurate a description as any.

@@GEnIE Park
Where are you planning to spend your next vacation? If you haven't already decided, you should give serious consideration to the local GEnIE Park. A Genetically Engineered Integrated Environment is the perfect place to relax, unwind, and recharge your creative batteries. Every one of these facilities is a beautiful natural preserve, with sparkling waterfalls, luxurious gardens, exotic plants and animals--and it's all totally safe! Inside the bubble, modern engineering and genetic techniques have created a little taste of paradise. What are you waiting for?

@@Gravitic Generator
Complete control over gravity has been a goal and a dream since that long ago day when we first discovered this fundamental force of the universe. Now that that dream is a reality, we find that applied gravitics have even more potential than anyone could have foreseen. This wondrous facility generates power for industrial purposes by drawing it from the gravitational well-field energy of any nearby planet. In simple (but unavoidably misleading) terms, the gravitic generator derives energy by damping minute shifts in the planet's gravitational field. (These shifts are one result of the ubiquitous phase-shift-like tensor eddies in an eleven dimensional extrapolation of the local Minkowskian geometry.) As the source of this energy is a part of the basic structure of local space-time, there is no potential for biotoxic pollution from the process. Apart from an immeasurably small hastening of the eventual heat-death of the galaxy, this energy source has no negative consequences at all. The gravitic generator also has one odd side effect that we do not yet fully comprehend. The biochaos in terrain in proximity to the generator is quiescent; the hypermutational curse is only half as virulent as normal.

@@Guild Library
Data collection and storage is a serious affair. As a civilization grows and becomes more complex, it develops a need for organizational structures to moderate the flow of information. Just as the guilds of ancient history acted to control and guarantee the quality and price of certain kinds of work, so the modern guild libraries act as centers of operation and data storage, ensuring the free flow and high quality of the information in a city. The usual result is an overall increase in the amount of accurate data available.

@@Harbor Town
Ever since the dawn of mercantile shipping, a certain type of neighborhood has grown up around any port. These areas are universally a source of experienced crews, both for manning vessels and speeding repair of damaged ships. Harbor towns also tend to be regions of less than savory reputation. Rather than waiting for the neighborhood to spring up on its own, modern city planners design and build an area intended for just this purpose. Subtle maintenance and quiet policing preserve the residents' free-booting way of life and their illusion of liberty while ensuring the safety of both the permanent population and the inevitable tourists.

@@Harvester
With advances in chaos biogenics, it became possible to "activate" a region of land to create ultraproductive farmlands dubbed "tohubohu" by agricultural specialists. In these areas, the crops grow and ripen so quickly that it is impossible to take full advantage of this fecundity without specialized machinery. That's where the Harvester comes in. This gargantuan, self-controlling robot with adaptive automata systems built in can harvest any crop with mind-boggling efficiency and speed. It analyzes the needs of a field, then performs whatever tasks are necessary--threshing, reaping, collection, or any other job. Once the produce is in the Harvester's processing bins, it is "deactivated" using primitive prionic stabilization techniques. This halts the biogenic ripening process and makes the food suitable and safe for consumption.

@@Hologaming Arcade
It's been common knowledge since the late twentieth century that computerized games and sports are one of the most addictive forms of entertainment ever devised by humans. With the invention of holographic total immersion techniques, the industry has been elevated to a new level--community service provider. In the ancient tradition of "bread and circuses" to keep the peace, a publicly funded full-service hologaming arcade can pacify an otherwise terminally malcontent segment of the population.

@@Hydroponic Reserve
Early in the history of colonies on the new world, small scale hydroponic farming of food plants salvaged from the wreckage of the starship were all that stood between the fragile colonies and extinction. The crops were grown in shallow water rather than the local soil, which prevented infection by local microorganisms and tainting by toxic substances in the dirt. The water was supplied with pure, chemically derived nutrients. When the settlers eventually regained some of the science that had enabled them to reach this planet, gene tailoring efforts transformed many of the local flora into safe and nutritious foods. A hydroponic reserve facility provides a dependable food source inside the city that is immune to both the vagaries of climate and to besieging armies. Its output is enough to provide a boost to the growth of the city, but not enough to sustain the entire city. Do not expect this to act as a hedge against starvation.

@@Infomatrix
Unforeseen advances in crystal thermionics led to breakthrough discoveries in systems for data storage, manipulation, and retrieval. The long and short of it is that finally, civilization realized the modern dream of handling information via non-volatile physical structures that allow super-fast state changes. The resulting design for the first Infomatrix, a centralized data management system serving all the research institutions in an entire city, had scientists getting in fist-fights over who would have first access. Eventually, everyone was able to use the device, and the free, extremely fast, unhindered flow of information proved the worth of the Infomatrix by greatly increasing the scientific output of every city in which one was built.

@@Instaporter
Before the invention of positronic computing devices, data transfer and processing capabilities were far too limited to allow effective instantaneous transport. The theory behind this technology is not new; the science is based on early explorations in quantum theory, of a side effect that was called "quantum teleportation" by the researchers of the time. Practical application of these primitive techniques proved impossible, however, and only the discovery of super-capacity computing brought about useful invention in this field. There are still uncertainties in the process, however. Transport over interplanetary distances--or even from a planet into orbit--is impossible, and specially designed interference (jamming) devices can interrupt and degrade the signal enough to prevent transport.

@@Investment House
Tracking the flow of data in a city is no small feat, and a great measure of inefficiency creeps into the system when there is no central monitoring station. The civil servants working in this facility, with the help of dedicated electronic brains, both watch the city-wide data-stream and exercise moderate control over it. Their subtle manipulations not only result in a smoother, more efficient, and ultimately more profitable tide of information coursing through the city, but also add substantially to the data income of the city government itself, through minimal channel taxes.

@@Justice Network
The Citizens' Compact is an explicit social contract. Under the Compact, one of the enumerated responsibilities of every citizen is to advance the honest, just, and fair application of the law. Cities under the rule of this extended honor system have no police forces as such, but early experience quickly taught that there were individuals who could not resist the temptation to abuse such a system. In response, the rewritten Compact called for the establishment of the Justice Network--a para-governmental citizen's group dedicated to the enforcement, on the rare occasions it becomes necessary, of the Compact's punishment clauses.

@@Laboratory
So long as society does not devolve into irrationality, science progresses regardless of whether there are facilities dedicated to it. However, its pace is slow. Without the proper instruments, research libraries, and other necessities that only a government-funded laboratory can provide, certain types of research are nearly impossible. A shielded place to perform high energy experiments, a clean room for genetic testing, a reliable power source for refrigerated storage of specimens--all these things add significantly to the research output of a city's citizens, and therefore of the empire of which the city is a part.

@@M.A.I.D.S.
The Metropolitan Automated Integrated Department of Sanitation (M.A.I.D.S.) was originally conceived and developed by Bilger Cybernetics Labs. It's a fully robotic, completely self-maintaining system of automated cleaning devices and sanitation robots. Cleverly camouflaged substations built into every part of the city open when necessary and disgorge whatever specialized equipment is needed for the task--debris removal, sewage flow control, or simple everyday dusting and garbage relocation. A M.A.I.D.S. system not only makes any city a nicer place to live, it also results in a substantial decrease in the incidences of disease, allergic reactions, and accidental poisoning.

@@Morphic Generator
Energy is one of the primary requirements for building a city's industrial capacity. While there are many ways to produce this power, history teaches that all come with a certain measure of pollution. The morphic generator is no exception, but it's better than a carbon combustion plant. Advances in the study of the hyperadaptive capabilities of heteromorphic ribonucleic acids make it possible to extract useful amounts of energy from the process of mutation itself. It's a complex and expensive process--and the cancer rate among workers in the generator facility is extraordinary--but the end result seems well worth it. Industry gets the power it need, and as a beneficial side effect, a city can divert fully half of the biotoxic industrial waste materials it produces into the morphic tanks, thereby significantly lowering the potential for causing biological instability in nearby regions. In addition, any power generating facilities based on combustion can be decommissioned.

@@Mutandis Museum
It is one of the embarrassing realities of our culture that the "freak show" has always existed in one form or another. From the ancient carnival sideshow through so-called "docudrama" television and the Anomaly Net, our species' sometimes cruel fascination with the unusual individuals among us has never flagged for long. The Mutandis Museum began its history as just such a show, flaunting the odd mutations that exposure to this new world caused. Eventually, however, with the development of genetic science and its concomitant art forms, the museum became something more. In its modern form, the Mutandis Museum fills many roles. There is still the prospect of the bizarre to draw those citizens who desire to view it, but these facilities have gradually evolved into institutions supplying both science education and the display of artistic endeavor. The result is strangely fascinating, and it serves the community, as well.

@@Nucleon Shield
One spin-off of nucleonic technology is that it allows precise localized control of the molecular organization of the air itself. Installed in a broadcast tower situated at the apex point of a parabola that covers the entire city, a nucleon shield generator can create a field that instantaneously restructures the molecules in the atmosphere around both the city and surrounding countryside for a few nanoseconds--solidifying the air into an indisintegrable quasicrystal for long enough to nullify the destructive effects of any disintegrator weapon.

@@Orrery
In these times, when our civilization is painstakingly digging its way out of the primitive situation into which we have fallen, it is often comforting to reflect on the accomplishments of our forefathers--accomplishments we hope to match and outdo someday soon. It was for this reason that citizen Crawley built the first prototype orrery--a large clockwork device illustrating the regular movements of the planets in this system. Erected in the center of his village, it became a symbol of the spacefaring civilization we once were and will be again. When it became clear how much joy this simple piece of scientific art gave the citizens of the town, Crawley designed a larger version suitable for a city.

@@Priodulcificator
No matter how careful and ecologically aware the citizens are, the population of any large urban center produces a vast quantity of waste materials. This is especially true of protean beings (Proteus Sapiens), who generate their own special forms of biological garbage. When a city is too big, the resulting outflow increases the chance that nearby terrain will collect a critical mass of bioactive materials and fall prey to a biochaotic chain reaction. The Priodulcificator is, in essence, a modern form of the ancient "sewage treatment plant" in which the biogenic structural energies of waste are prionically stabilized. This renders the materials inactive, leaving them completely harmless and useable as fertilizer or in other ways.

@@Satellite Uplink
As anyone who has lived in a technologically advanced civilization knows, it is not necessary to establish cities in orbit to gain some of the benefits of access to space. Fleets of artificial satellites in stable orbits--polar, equatorial, geosynchronous, and others--can relay massive amounts of data between any two points on the surface, vastly speeding communications of every type. When the government and citizens of a city can keep close communication with their capital city, it is almost as if the capital were not far away. Quick sharing of information helps reduce waste, inefficiency, and inaccuracy of many kinds. In addition, regular attention from high placed leaders can bolster the loyalty and contentedness of the city's residents.

@@Ship's Facility
Structure and propulsion are necessary, of course, but without a payload, there is no point to a vessel. The passengers carried on the first faster-than-light (FTL) ship are our emissaries to Earth--the nearest of the two original home worlds. Ship's facilities come in trios; one of each of the three types is required for the other two to function. Habitat is simply the living quarters for the emissaries. A Lability Cell ceaselessly provides the energies and materials required for the emissaries to maintain both life and protean flexibility. The Quantron Shield protects our representatives from dangerous side effects of both the abaryonic hyperfusion field cascade and the resulting FTL phase transitions.

@@Spaceport
To settle safely within the confines of a city, off-load cargo and passengers, and fill the holds with goods and persons for the next leg, a ship needs a port of some kind. In the special case of travel between planets, that port is commonly referred to as a spaceport. The facilities here are not significantly different in function from those in a seaport, though the techniques and the materials used certainly are. The biggest difference is that every spaceport includes a single-purpose vessel for interplanetary travel. These relatively tiny craft are not ships in their own right; they're a modified form of the emergency escape pods in which most of our ancestors rode to the surface of Funestis. Each pod can carry a single unit in deep-freeze suspension, and riding an ultra-fast trajectory, it can reach any friendly city in record time--but only if that city has a spaceport at which the craft can safely land. (Otherwise, the end result is too well scattered to even make a mess.)

@@Sphacelatorium
No matter how sophisticated industrial processes become, it seems that they will forever be burdened by dangerous by-products. Even now, when the majority of chemicals necessary for materiel production are generated by specially designed microorganisms, the specter of biochaotic pollution looms over every busy workshop. The sphacelatorium is an example of the same technology solving the problem that it has created. Advanced gene insertion techniques have allowed the creation of a novel bacillus that can break down virtually any organism or organic output a workshop or power plant might produce. Any biological "problems" are sent to this facility to be destroyed by a microorganism designed specifically for the job.

@@Superstructure
The mechanical stresses produced when the abaryonic hyperfusion drive is engaged are nearly beyond belief; no normal material could possibly withstand the physical strain of superluminal propulsion. Thus, there was no way to build structural components for such a ship until after the discovery of the ultra-tough monopolium compounds had led to giant leaps forward in the materials sciences. Each superstructural piece (especially the first, the spinal element) is designed to merge seamlessly with the rest of the ship, creating a hull-and-skeleton construction that is, in effect, a one-piece ship. Every additional bit adds to the strength and stability of the vessel. Without the requisite superstructure, none of the other parts of the ship--drive or facilities--will function.

@@Transmogrifier
Despite the claims made by some practitioners, transmutation is still really more of an art than a science. Changing non-living matter from one form to another is tricky. Even the finest facility needs an expert hand on the controls, and the best TransEngs (transmutation engineers) have an instinctive feel for the process that simply cannot be taught. With a good artist at the helm, a Transmogrifier facility readily converts common raw materials into rarer, more useful materials. This adds substantially to the productivity of the city's Workshop.

@@Tsunamines
Interdepartmental work to cross lines of specialization and combine developments in robotics and mechanized warfare made possible this advanced naval defense system. When a fleet of tsunamines is installed, the entire navigable coastal area near a city is seeded with semi-intelligent devices. When the advanced IFF sensors detect an enemy naval unit, the tsunamines send out a warning signal tuned to a classified, preset frequency. When sufficient time has elapsed that most civilian shipping should be clear of the danger zone, the mines self-actuate. Following an ultra-fast, chaotic stirring pattern, the mines whip the navigable lanes into a violent foment--much as the average hurricane would. Needless to say, this artificial tempest gives the forces defending the city a great advantage.

@@Workshop
Nothing can replace the independent craftsman, working alone, for sheer inventiveness and quality of workmanship. However, when what a city needs is quantity and speedy construction, a centralized workshop becomes indispensable. When the supply of tools, materials, work space, and machinery is collected in one central location, stored in a place known and accessible to all, and available at any time, the productivity in a city soars. Any citizen can volunteer his or her skills and free time to help out on whatever project is most important to the city--and given the chance, most citizens will. With the addition of advanced power sources, a workshop can continue to provide a boost in productivity indefinitely.

@WONDER_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@WONDER_INDEX
13,			; NutriNet
6,			; Great Games
26,			; Wizard Scouts
20,			; Sea Guides
0,			; Acrolectic Solenoid
24,			; Taniq Planetarium
1,			; All-Field
11,			; MILQUETOAST
18,			; Recyclotron
10,			; Marconi Tower
9,			; Living Wage
23,			; SITW Project
14,			; Oceanus Field
21,			; Singing Gardens
12,			; Morphon Attractor
22,			; Sir Arthur's Stone
3,			; Combine
2,			; Central Service
5,			; Fleck's Genesis
8,			; Julian Bureaucracy
17,			; Psi-brator
15,			; Organ Bank
7,			; HeLa Turbine
16,			; Penance
27,			; Xenosabe Concourse
25,			; View From Earth
4,			; Eureka Institute
19,			; Roscoe's Circus
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Acrolectic Solenoid
Hovering ceaselessly overhead, this marvelous and unexplained structure does a great service for civilization, but especially for the one empire that constructed it. The workings of the Acrolectic Solenoid are impossible to describe without recourse to xenolinguistic paramathematics and the theory of Much Higher Functions. It is not untrue to say that it "attracts" language to itself similar to the way a magnet attracts iron filings, but it is also so much of a simplification that it obscures the truth. The Solenoid converts everything it receives into a metalingual form (a universal language, if you will) and transmits on a wavelength known only to its controllers.

@@All-Field
When teachers need to impress their students with an example of the miracles provided by modern science, the All-Field come quickly to mind. Though not the most technologically astounding feat in history, this application of the UFT (universal field theory) is certainly one of the most colorful and practical on this hostile new world. Based on the UFT--a successful theory that describes the basic field structure of the entire universe--this remarkable device takes advantage of the interconnectedness of all things to erect defensive fields of force around every city in the empire--even those on other planets! Needless to say, this impressive display often convinces unfriendly empires to enter into negotiations rather than fight. Any description of the physical structure of the All-Field generator are necessarily incomplete, because significant portions of it exist only in dimensions we cannot sense.

@@Central Service
Maintenance is the hidden cost of most great endeavors. No matter how a wise ruler strives to improve the cities of the empire, the cost of on-going care for the municipal facilities places a limit on how much can be done. That has been true of all nations throughout history, with one notable exception--the ruler who called for the design and construction of the Central Service. This bold initiative was far ahead of its time. Until then, no one had envisioned a centralized organization dedicated to maintaining the integrity and cleanliness of facilities in every city. Using the primitive automation that was available at the time was another stroke of genius. These tireless staffers, under the supervision of biological managers, proved to be the mainstay of the effort.

@@Combine
Some fear that the computing sciences are advancing faster than our ability to monitor or control them. To those beings, Combine is a monstrosity of technology gone awry. The rest of us, however, can see the vast opportunity for scientific progress that the melding of biological and computational brains can provide. Though the details of this engineering marvel are shrouded in government secrecy, the effects are clear. "Combine" is the accepted name for the mass-mind formed when dozens of citizen volunteers temporarily join their intellects through the medium of specially designed, hyper-advanced processors. Working in shifts, the combineers continually produce new ideas and inventive suggestions. The result is a great acceleration of research.

@@Eureka Institute
Despite what most people believe, the Eureka Institute is not merely a legend; this facility and its remarkable staff actually exist--or did at one time. The finest minds, scoured from all through the system (sometimes kidnapped or brought in at gun-point), were collected here and put to work--not to produce research solutions of their own, but to find a way to increase the scientific output of the entire empire. Combining elements of genetic artistry, psionic reverberation theory, and other fields in an unfettered interdisciplinary approach, this secretive little campus has harnessed some of the fundamental forces of the universe to transmit their results into every citizen of the nation. Their goal and their successful result--an ongoing rise in the overall creativity and insight of the entire population. The resulting swell in scientific achievement has been no less than magnificent.

@@Fleck's Genesis
An eminent and respected scientist, Fleck had little trouble convincing the powers that be to fund his proposal for the largest, best outfitted, and most expensive research facility to ever grace a planet in this system. The construction project dragged on for years, while Fleck had ever more and more elaborate and unusual equipment designed and built. Anxious and impatient with the continual construction delays, the renowned researcher moved into the nearly completed main building several days before it was scheduled to open, and began work. What actually happened the night before the facility was to officially be opened to its staff will likely never be known, but the most believable theory (based on events) is that Fleck cross-wired the hyperentropic phantasmatron with the bilateral-protonic quantinaria, bypassing both the safety cut-offs and recording devices. The resulting catastrophic release of energy (described by one witness as, "the most bizarre and beautiful explosion I have ever seen") leveled the entire complex. Fleck himself was found by emergency personnel on a nearby curb, seemingly unhurt. Without speaking, he handed the rescue workers the groundbreaking document now famous as Fleck's Genesis--two startling scientific discoveries in one simple paragraph--and promptly stepped in front of a moving vehicle.

@@Great Games
Gladiatorial combat is a barbaric entertainment that appeals to the most bestial and loathsome elements in our psychological makeup. Its resurgence was truly a symptom of the depths to which our species had sunk in the years following our unplanned landing in this system. Thankfully for all involved, the development of non-living, automated contestants came before civilization as we know it could collapse completely. Nowadays, regular contests between extremely lifelike robotic forms pander to the population's baser instincts--without any loss of life. The Great Games not only provide an outlet for the more vicious leanings of our species, but in the process significantly increase the contentment of citizens throughout the empire.

@@HeLa Turbine
The famed HeLa cell line is the longest-lived continually reproducing line in the history of genetic research. It was not until our studies uncovered the many forms of biogenic energy that we came to understand the source of this line's longevity. By some unknown agency, these long-distant descendants of Henrietta Lacks' tumor contain and produce levels of morphogenic energy that put normal cells to shame. The immense HeLa Turbine takes advantage of this power, concentrated by biochaotic funneling fields, to drive banks of giant generators night and day. These in turn provide extra power for every workshop in every city throughout the entire empire.

@@Julian Bureaucracy
Named after (but not developed by) a legendary figure out of Earth history, the Julian Bureaucracy is the single most complex organization ever devised. This system of running an empire (not to be confused with a system of government) is so byzantine, so intricate, so convoluted and elaborate that no one, perhaps not even the ruler nominally in charge, truly knows from one day to the next what's going on or who has authority over what--or even what type of government is in place. The resulting insecurity at every level of the government gives whoever is actually in power incredible latitude to make sweeping changes--with no one the wiser.

@@Living Wage
Now that one is in place, it's sometimes difficult to imagine life in a nation without an explicit, recorded social contract for all citizens. Perhaps the most striking mystery is why throughout history, large and nominally free populations allowed various oppressive economies to not only survive, but thrive without providing the basic requital that (in retrospect) was so obviously their responsibility. The first nation to add the guarantee of a Living Wage to its contract was ruled by no less than a visionary. Under the historic Amendment 32, every citizen who contributes to the welfare of the community receives compensation that is, by force of the contract, at least adequate to provide a reasonable standard of living. Anything less would be uncivilized.

@@Marconi Tower
Radio is not new. Towers that both broadcast and receive are not new. In fact, there were only two striking things about the legendary Marconi Tower--it's size, and the fact that it had built into it the most advanced computerized xenotranslation facility ever to exist in this system. This monumental communications device stood lofty enough to nearly reach into orbit from the surface. Designed to take advantage of every electromagnetic quirk of Lalande 21185's planetary space, the Marconi could reach to and receive from every ball of rock or gas orbiting the star. The integrated xenolinguistic capabilities allowed negotiation between the empire that owned the tower and any other nation, without exception. Needless to say, it also functioned quite well for purposes of covert information gathering.

@@MILQUETOAST
"Every rookie a veteran."
Developed by the finest strategic and tactical minds our civilization has to offer, the MILitary QUantum Experiential Training Operation And Simulation Technique is a highly advanced system for collecting field combat experiences and using them as holographic virtual training simulations. Biorobotic implantations in field soldiers of all stripes accumulate and transmit the sensory data necessary to generate ersatz battle situations that are realistic down to the smell of plasma-seared flesh and the texture of the mud in your boots. This allows for extremely effective training sessions that, as an added side effect, subtly diminishes the average infantry soldier's aversion to dying.

@@Morphon Attractor
In philosophical circles, there are fringe elements in which it is acceptable to speak of the "morphon"--a theoretical subatomic particle that is the definition of a unit of change (as the electron defines the unit of electrical charge). Those who believe in the existence of morphons rely on speculative "hyper-chaos" theories to examine the nature of these unusual particles. Certain specialists on the fringe of the fringe have postulated "attractor geometries" that could collect, align, and focus morphons for practical use. Regardless of whether these theories are true, they are the only cogent arguments that seem to explain why and how this orbiting swarm of bioactive rocks actually works. This nearly magical device, constructed using funds from a skeptical government, generates as yet unmeasurable energies that metamorphose military units, both organic and mechanical, in the field, at home, and in production. Though the cause is beyond understanding, the effect is unquestionably wondrous.

@@NutriNet
With the advent of instaportation technology, it was only a matter of time before someone figured out a way to use it to move foodstuffs from one city to another. It took a stroke of organizational genius, however, to design a system that could move food efficiently throughout an entire empire. Although it has not eliminated starvation, the NutriNet gives every city a safety factor on which it can rely in times of want and need.

@@Oceanus Field
Once again, tampering with the fundamental fields of our universe has resulted in great practical gains. The Oceanus Field is the latest and, perhaps, most impressive demonstration of our growing mastery over even the most basic forces of nature. The scientific details are difficult to comprehend by all but the few experts in the fields of Forward Vectoring and Megatonic Geometries. The end result is a micro-layer of force around the hull of every ship. This layer dynamically compensates for the drag of whatever fluid (water, space, suspended dust, or gases) through which the ship moves, which eases and speeds movement significantly. The efficient beauty of this system is that the field, once generated, can easily be extended to include every sea- or space-going vessel the empire owns, no matter where in the system they are.

@@Organ Bank
One of the few unequivocal benefits of advanced genetic science is that our hospitals can now artificially generate organs for much needed transplants. It is no longer true that one being must donate an organ--or even die--to save the life of another. In fact, donated body parts are less desirable and cause more complications than those grown specifically from the patient's own cultured cells. The Organ Bank is a central repository for cells cultured in advance, as insurance against the onslaught of a condition, and a modern facility dedicated to growing perfect replacement organs in the least possible time. Needless to say, the citizens of the empire find security and a measure of contentment in knowing that, should they have a dire need, the Organ Bank will provide for their health.

@@Penance
With great power comes great responsibility.

Disintegration is perhaps the most horrific technology ever devised by intelligent beings. Though we have uncountable ways of causing destruction, none are as convenient and easy, and all of them result in some sort of physical reminder of the horror of war--an ugly aftermath. In comparison, disintegrator weapons leave no visible trace of their victims. As a wise human once said, "Killing has always been easy. It is when it becomes convenient and clean that it ceases to horrify. Then we all become monsters."

Any truly civilized species, if it survives long enough and becomes technologically advanced enough to create disintegrator weapons, should also understand the ethical and moral problems inherent in using them. In this system, our psychology has developed in such a way that it is unthinkable that any empire, no matter how militaristic, should build such devices until their future victims have been honored. The Penance, a great, sad monument to tomorrow's dead, is our eternal reminder of the cost of using science in pursuit of war.

@@Psi-brator
Psionics is far from being an exact science, but there is enough certain knowledge to make this cunning device possible. The Psi-brator is nothing less than a giant quasi-crystalline psionic broadcast tower. This immoral machine continually emits signals intended to control the minds of every individual on the planet and in the system. Luckily for those who do not control the tower, the effect is subtle and not at all powerful. Still, over time, even the staunchest enemies can be "mind-controlled" into acting like friends.

@@Recyclotron
This massive municipal recycling project is truly a wonder of modern technology and ingenuity. Using a coordinated system of low input, high output tanks, and relying on several different processes--chemical, biological, mechanical, and physical--the Recyclotron breaks down industrial waste materials into their components (down to the level of individual atoms, if necessary). These purified elements can then be passed on to other industries and put to good use. By allowing the re-use of a significant portion of the materiel otherwise wasted in the production process, this facility can increase the city's effective overall resources--without creating any further drain on the local ecology.

@@Roscoe's Circus
No matter the species, no matter the planet, it seems that the young and young at heart love a circus. Brightly colored tents, strange animals, and unusual performances provide lively entertainment throughout the empire. As this famous traveling show moves from city to city under the direction of its famed ringmaster (known only by his stage name, Roscoe), it brings a little joy into lives that--considering that we're stranded for the foreseeable future on a strange planet far from home--can be worn down by too much sobriety and not enough gaiety. Though he admits to being in it primarily for the income, Roscoe does a valuable community service by presenting the touring circus every year.

@@Sea Guides
The legendary Sea Guides were the result of a massive genetic engineering project. In those early days of biogenic research, knowledge was not as widespread nor techniques as advanced, and the creation of an entirely new species was considered a great accomplishment. In fact, it was. This race of sea creatures were "wired" with instincts that served the purposes of naval travel. In a sense, their lives were dedicated to aiding the seagoing vessels of the empire that created them. Though only semi-intelligent, the Sea Guides were capable of forming close bonds with their owners, and of following a relatively complex series of orders. Valued for their companionship as much as their help in navigation, the guides became something of a problem in later years. Made obsolete by advances in electronic equipment, the species was no longer necessary. In the end, the Sea Guides were engineered again--raised to a high level of intelligence and given the freedom any sentient species deserves. Though they no longer serve, they still accompany the crew of most planet-bound vessels.

@@Singing Gardens
Few things are more pleasant and relaxing than a garden. Fewer still are more capable of eliciting emotion than music. Intensive study of the keening crystal trees of Naumachia eventually resulted in the widespread hobby of crystal gardening. This wondrous park is the culmination of the efforts of the finest, most expert crystal horticulturalists in the system--a mesmerizing series of gardens filled with crystalline trees of every description, vibrating in tonic patterns to generate overlapping areas of beautiful music. Within each zone, the melodies and complex harmonies are distinct, and in the areas of overlap, they some counterpoint others, some intertwine, and still others reinforce and strengthen one another. The overall effect is magnificent.

@@Sir Arthur's Stone
Our survival on this unknown world is a tribute to the strength of our species. That we have prospered is a testament to our spirit. This immense monument, carved out of a solitary mountain by the most expert craftsmen, pays tribute to that spirit and helps to maintain it through the generations. Sir Arthur's Stone is an inspiration to all who know of it.

@@SITW Project
This secret government project, nicknamed "SITW" by those few conspirators who have come forward to leak information (and subsequently disappeared), is an enigma. What little is known supports the hypothesis that this effort is behind the seemingly overnight rise in the general level of intelligence in nearly every one of our citizens. Fragments of documents retrieved from the smoking ruins of secret labs suggest that tampering with the city's water supply was the modus operandi. Perhaps the biggest question is why those in authority chose to keep this project a secret, when the benefits to all have been so plain and undeniable.

@@Taniq Planetarium
The Planetarium of Bethaldo Taniq is a magnificent structure. Taniq saw the promise in holographic projection techniques long before any others of his species. In a time when interplanetary travel was little more than a dream for most citizens, he built a theater in which anyone could truly feel as if they were traveling through space. Having been through any of Taniq's extraordinary presentations, no one could ever look on an Orrery again without feeling somehow more affected, more fulfilled, than ever before.

@@View From Earth
To see the Earth for the first time is a moment of staggering emotional impact. The beautiful blue globe that was the cradle of the human species inspires all of us, even those with no trace of Terran ancestry, to dream of a return to our home world. This gargantuan telescope, built and based in the space between planets, was built for the sole purpose of receiving light from that far off world (though it has provided handy maps of the planets on which we now live). General distribution of these views through the system infonets has created a tremendous longing in every citizen to return to Earth. Any nation, any empire with the requisite technology that fails to begin construction of a starship in the near future is risking the goodwill of its subjects and plotting a course for its own downfall.

@@Wizard Scouts
Who among us was not a member of the Wizard Scouts in their youth? Who doesn't have fond memories of weekends spent scouring the countryside for undiscovered species and unusual mutations? I'd wager there's a small pile of merit badges packed away in nearly every closet--a source of pride in early years and of cherished reminiscence later in life. None of us really cared at that age that our city benefited from the field trips and data gathering outings; it was fun, it was adventure, and we made friendships that would last a summer, if not our lifetimes.

@@Xenosabe Concourse
In all the history of our species and the known intelligent aliens, open communication has been the surest road to peace. This remarkable orbiting conference center is the pinnacle of peacemaking efforts in our planetary system. Removed from the confines of national boundaries, the greatest diplomats in the system are free to seek just, equitable solutions to political and economic disagreements that might otherwise lead to war--which profits no one.

@UNIT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@UNIT_INDEX
10,			; Colonist
15,			; Environeer
9,			; Coercor
38,			; Nidus
21,			; Guardians
46,			; Repeller
44,			; R.A.T.
11,			; Corsair
5,			; Blue Willie
28,			; Intelliraptor
40,			; Pasticcio
6,			; Bolter
26,			; HohMann
47,			; Rocket Man
30,			; Iron Maiden
39,			; Ophion
31,			; Ixion
24,			; Havoc
7,			; Bombus
41,			; Pedipalpi
45,			; Raia
32,			; Jury Rigger
19,			; Griffe
54,			; Transceratops
17,			; Feephi
20,			; Grume
58,			; Vector Morbus
29,			; Interceptor
3,			; Annulus
22,			; Gyrfalcon
34,			; Kineticore
23,			; Hammer
60,			; Yare
51,			; Skipjack
33,			; Kelpie
49,			; Shuttle
50,			; Skimmer
8,			; Bulldog
1,			; AENEAC
16,			; Excelsior
13,			; Dreadnought
43,			; Pristrix
18,			; Flattop
14,			; Dropship
53,			; Sting
37,			; Ne Plus Ultra
2,			; Ambassador
48,			; Salmagundy
4,			; Arabber
25,			; Hi-DIE Tanker
59,			; Xenocide
36,			; Melior
55,			; Typhoeus
35,			; Mediary
57,			; Ur-Titan
42,			; Plasm
27,			; Homicide
61,			; Singulon
52,			; Speed Demon
12,			; Dondasch
56,			; Urdar
0,			; Adamastor
-1,			; Extra 1
-1,			; Extra 2
-1,			; Extra 3
-1,			; Extra 4
-1,			; Extra 5
-1,			; Extra 6
-1,			; Extra 7
-1,			; Extra 8
-1,			; Extra 9
-1,			; Extra 10
-1,			; Extra 11
-1,			; Extra 12
-1,			; Extra 13
-1,			; Extra 14
-1,			; Extra 15
-1,			; Extra 16
-1,			; Extra 17
-1,			; Extra 18
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Adamastor
Named after the titan who, in legend, invaded heaven, the Adamastor is a nearly complete mystery. We have not even discovered (at a substantial cost in investigator's lives) whether they are biological or mechanical in nature. These massive, powerful beings roam the planet Nona, and surveillance data suggests that they were created by the HaGibborim long ago. Some have speculated that they are a security force, put in place to guard the secrets of that long-gone race. Whatever the case they are virtually indestructible--especially since they hover high above most of our units. There is no known reason why the Adamastor should not be capable of interplanetary travel.

@@AENEAC
When the first All-Environment Naval Experimental Assault Craft rolled out of drydock, the manipulation of attractors in chaotic biogenic systems was still unproven technology. Because this destroyer-sized ship relied on exactly that technology for both propulsion and weapons power, it was considered experimental. Even after the AENEAC concept proved out, the name stuck. For propulsion, the AENEAC projects a field around its hull that (through the magic of advanced chaos biogenics) exactly conforms to whatever environment it is in, allowing the ship to move through it with only negligible resistance. This also provides a great deal of defense for the ship, but not as much as one might at first think. When reversed momentarily, the field strikes out at everything around it--which is of utility as a weapon.

@@Ambassador
Diplomacy has been an important part of human relations for as long as records have been kept, though the notion of people making it their career appeared much later. A roving ambassador's primary function is to make and maintain contact with other civilizations--in times of peace and war and regardless of the current state of affairs--and report on any developments of interest. Diplomats have traditionally also engaged in more practical activities, including sabotage of enemy production, theft of scientific advances, and subversion of enemy troops and cities. Though they are of no use in actual combat, ambassadors are nevertheless potent weapons.

@@Annulus
Unusual as it might seem, the technology of flight has followed a different path on this new world than it did on our original home planet. The laws of physics and aerodynamics are, of course, the same here as there, but the materials and sciences available to us are not. It proved simpler on Funestis to take advantage a newly developed electromagnetic (E-M) repulsion field effects than to go the traditional airfoil route. The result was the Annulus, a ring-like vessel capable of limited range flight. This unrefined and somewhat graceless craft was incapable of air to air combat, but quite effective in an air to ground role. Advances in flight technology quickly made it obsolete, but for a time it reigned as the queen of the skies. Though it was able to travel in space, the range limitation of the Annulus made it difficult to use for more than local exploration missions.

@@Arabber
Trade has been a major source of income to civilizations throughout history. Journeying to distant lands, caravans exchanged their loads of goods for money or other items of value. In addition, the traders who accompanied the caravans often brought back new knowledge about the advances made by the civilizations with whom they did business. Marco Polo, for example, went with traders to China. He remained there for many years, and brought back much valuable information to the West.

@@Blue Willie
For many years, biologists were baffled by the Willie plant. Perhaps the greatest shock came when the ambulatory stage--the Blue Willie--was first encountered. The survivors told of a seemingly mindless, violent swamp creature, determined to protect the patch of Willies under study. Later tests showed the Blues to be animal-like in form and function, but undeniably a form of plant life, down to the cellular level. This form seems to be a metamorphosed Yellow Willie (which in turn is a stress-induced variant of the normal Willie) generated when a crop of these plants finds itself subjected to a recurring threat. Though the Willies are native to Funestis, research has shown that the spores are capable of surviving indefinitely in space. Thus, it would not be surprising to find them anywhere in the system--or out of it.

@@Bolter
"Bolter" is the lasting nickname for any being armed with a primitive plasma discharge weapon. Early in our history on Funestis, we managed to re-develop the technology for building plasma rifles. These are not the advanced weaponry you might remember from the history database; these were clumsy, backpack-sized generators that fired what were essentially aimed bolts of lightning. To avoid being destroyed by its own weapon, the Bolter had to wear a full-body protective suit with radiative fins. The rifle itself fired twin beams--a precursor collimation laser to create an ionized path to the target, and the plasma discharge itself, which naturally followed the charged path.

@@Bombus
This new planet is full of surprises. Depending on your viewpoint, the existence of the Bombus is either one of the more useful ones or one of the most annoying. The "giant bumblebee" was originally created as a tool for an experiment into the aerodynamics of flight. The major stumbling block--providing anatomical stability for an insectoid form at that size without an exoskeleton--was overcome using a remarkably strong egg-shaped, sub-dermal, cartilaginous cage structure. Unfortunately, a number of the test creatures escaped from the lab, including one queen female. Efforts to eradicate them have met with little success, but domestication has proven to be possible, and many Bombi have been trained to carry warriors. Luckily, these immense insects do not seem to be capable of space flight.

@@Bulldog
The terrible gravity, pressure, and corrosive gasses on Nona (or any gas giant planet, for that matter) make things tough for all units there, but especially for the naval vessels that ply the "seas" of gasses. The Bulldog is one of the very few units--military or civilian--able to survive in such a harsh environment. Due to the pressurization and other design features necessary for functioning in its intended environment, the Bulldog is not capable of leaving the planet Nona; it would explode instantly on leaving the high-pressure levels of the Nonan atmosphere.

@@Coercor
The Coercor Corps is the traditional warrior caste of our society--protector of kings and egg-breeders alike. Though nearly all of our Coercors sacrificed themselves in the crash to protect the surviving Nidus beings, we have retained the memory of their creed, their laws, and the ways of training new Coercors. It is a fact of history that some trained Coercors go rogue and find a home out in the wild country. That is as it should be, and should not dissuade any wise ruler from training a cadre of these fine warriors.

@@Colonist
Faced with a desperate situation, humans often find in themselves previously unsuspected reserves of strength and skill. Such has been the case among the crew and passengers of the wrecked starship. These people were originally selected for the trip because they would make excellent colonists for an totally alien world, and they've since proven themselves time and again. These women and men are the pioneers--the families of homesteaders, city builders, farmers, ranchers, road layers, mine workers, and the nuclear population of every settlement.

@@Corsair
Piracy has often been a plague on human shipping, and just as often been the surreptitious tool of the powers that be. The modern Corsair is no different, except in the weapons and equipment at his disposal. Though swashbuckling would perhaps be impractical in a more advanced society, the current semi-civilized state in which we find ourselves allows for quite a bit of latitude. Armed with the traditional saber and the not-so-traditional laser pistol, these independent minded, piratical rogues are a force to be reckoned with--as likely to arise spontaneously from among the country folk as to be following the orders of some ruler or another.

@@Dondasch
Even after extended study (from afar), we know next to nothing about the Dondasch. For reasons that will be obvious should you meet up with one, we have named them after a legendary giant who could destroy anything with the strength of his arms. These things might be organisms, creatures, beings, or simply devices--we simply do not know. What is certain is that they roam Nona, and all the evidence indicates that they have existed since the time when the ancient HaGibborim still inhabited that planet. The Dondasch are fast and violent and seem to protect areas that were once important to that race. They are nearly indestructible, and are quite likely to be capable of interplanetary travel.

@@Dreadnought
The aptly named Dreadnought class of space ship is the last word in naval strength. Though tactics may have passed it by, leaving it perhaps no longer the most effective unit in the military strategist's arsenal, it is still beyond doubt the most physically impressive. This "space battleship" boasts the largest, most powerful engines ever designed, and has greater firepower than any vessel known. Its most important weakness is simply that it is too big; the hull of the Dreadnought cannot support its own weight on the surface of a planet. Floating in space or the atmosphere of a gas giant, it is able to equalize pressures through quantronic buoyancy exchange, but once it touches the surface of a planet, there's no stopping the complete collapse of the hull.

@@Dropship
Troop transport is one of the most important support functions in any military operation, and the Dropship was designed with exactly that in mind. This ultramodern naval vessel is at home in any sea-like environment, including open space and the atmospheres of gas giant planets. Thanks to its quantum gravitic propulsion system, the Dropship has no need to be ferried from planet to planet by other units. It is quite capable of independent interplanetary flight. The only possible drawback to this unit is a necessity of design; because its primary utility is conveying units of all types from planet to planet, this vessel is lightly armed, and then only for defense.

@@Environeer
As the science of environmental engineering progresses and the tasks involved become more and more complex, the role of the individual human has made the transition from worker to manager. The Environeer is a fully functional, automated trailblazer--not a replacement for the human pioneer, but a tool in his or her capable hands. This magnificent, all-purpose, mobile robotic device not only does everything a Colonist can do (and twice as fast), but it also has the power to transform some types of terrain into other types--level mountains, drain swamps, and the like. They're certainly not graceful, but the Environeer series is perhaps the most useful non-military automaton yet created.

@@Excelsior
MRWM designs simply do not get any better than this. The Excelsior model closed the book on war machine technology--no new designs have even come close to production as long as this one has stood as the standard to overcome. With an armored hull made entirely of solid metallic hydrogen, the Excelsior is virtually indestructible. This unit is not just tough; it can travel nearly anywhere--over land or sea, through atmosphere and space--and can travel from planet to planet on its own steam.

@@Feephi
When the time came for us to look beyond mere defense, we were ready. Our new, temporary home was and is a hostile planet, and we determined to face up to the challenge it presented. The Feephi was our first attempt at breeding a specialized, large, creature for offensive military purposes. Unfortunately, though it is powerful on the attack, the Feephi has little or no instinct for self-preservation, and is rather slow and easy to kill. One balancing positive attribute is that the Feephi is not bothered by hostile environments, and could, in theory, even exist in space for a time.

@@Flattop
Ever since the dawn of modern combat, the naval aircraft carrier has been an indispensable part of every national military force. Carriers act as floating airfields, carrying smaller fighting fliers far from friendly territory, to be launched against enemy assets. This tactic allows air strikes against targets on both land and sea that would otherwise be far out of range. The range of the aircraft launched from carriers forever changed the methodology of naval battles. Carriers also have the capability to launch missiles. The Flattop is the logical extension of carrier theory into space-based operations. This advanced, all-planets carrier is powered by delerium crystal thermionics. It travels the oceans of every world and the sea of space, and can move from planet to planet on its own power.

@@Griffe
It was evident without discussion that the first truly metamorphic creature created through advanced organic engineering was to be named after the legendary Griffin. The Griffe is this creature--a tough military air-ground unit that is more than capable in a fight. Though it was made able to change shape, the Griffe's abilities were intentionally limited to lessen the risk of it being too powerful to control. You can imagine the destruction a rogue griffin could cause. Though it is able to survive in nearly any environment, the Griffe is still a biological organism, and thus it has no capacity for self-powered space flight.

@@Grume
A freak accident in one of our most distinguished mutation engineering laboratories resulted in the creation of this monstrous semi-organic device. The Grume has a natural ability, based in its bottom plates, to discount the pressures of gravity. We do not yet understand the source of this effect, but research has only begun. Note that this military device does not fly; it cannot achieve any significant altitude, only keep itself from dragging in the dirt and collapsing under its own vast weight. To attack, the Grume drops itself sharply to the ground. The resulting focused shock wave can do notable damage to a target. Due to its size, the Grume is not particularly maneuverable, and is thus vulnerable to attack. It has, however, proven able to survive in hostile environments, though we do not know exactly how.

@@Guardians
It didn't take long for the shipwrecked human groups to figure out that the power stored in their advanced weaponry would be better used for life support purposes. Faced with this limitation, the men and women responsible for the defense of the human settlements quickly re-invented "primitive" weapons--clubs, spears, and the like--that needed no power source and could be easily repaired or replaced using local resources. The Guardian militia is a cadre of volunteers and, when necessary, conscripts.

@@Gyrfalcon
It wasn't long before MRWM engineers and designers realized that the bipedal humanoid form was not necessarily the best template for huge military machines. More advanced models, such as the awe-inspiring Gyrfalcon, took forms better suited to their intended roles. The Gyrfalcon MRWM is a hover-capable air unit effective in any environment--in space or planetary atmosphere. Despite advances in interplanetary rocketry, the Gyrfalcon is meant for precision work. It does not have the engine power to travel from planet to planet on its own.

@@Hammer
The distinction between air to air and air to ground craft is often blurred, especially in the realm of space flight. The gargantuan Hammer, in comparison, is absolutely a "bomber" in design and nature. It is not capable of attacking other flying vessels, except in self defense. Its advanced missiles are, however, quite potent, and even a large squadron of Interceptors should think twice before facing one of these. Though the Hammer is capable of atmospheric flight, the humidity on water worlds (like Funestis) quickly degrades the vital semi-organic components in the inter-hull structural web, causing massive systems failure and unavoidable destruction.

@@Havoc
With the advent of self-adapting automated systems, it became possible to build MRWMs that could effectively change shape to fill the needs of their situation. The Havoc was the first of these multiform units. While traveling, the Havoc is more or less wolf-shaped, and moves on four "legs" for extra stability. In a fight, however, this MRWM "stands up" to raise both its sensing module and missile bays for better range and accuracy. Though at first the efficacy of this tactic was questioned by experienced commanders, the proof was soon forthcoming, and no one now doubts that a Havoc could bring force to bear on an enemy unit with unprecedented swiftness and aim.

@@Hi-DIE Tanker
The High-Density Import Export (Hi-DIE) Tankers are the modern equivalent of the Arraber trading wagons of our early days on this planet. These vehicles are little more than mobile containers. They rely on ultra-efficient and safe gravitational compression technology to carry truly immense amounts of cargo in a normal-sized vehicle. Thus, a filled Hi-DIE is extremely heavy, much more so than its size would suggest. The speed and convenience of these modern space-going shipping transports allows civilizations to set up supply routes and move large quantities of merchandise and trade goods farther and faster than ever.

@@HohMann
In the development of mechanized robotic war machines (MRWMs), the early days saw swift leaps ahead in technology and abilities. It wasn't long from the days of the Iron Maiden until the HohMann introduced interplanetary flight to MRWM design potential. Named after what is still recognized as the most efficient ballistic route between orbiting bodies (the Hohmann orbit), this behemoth was the very first model of MRWM capable of traveling on its own power between planets. In addition, unlike the Rocket Man design, the HohMann did not sacrifice as much in the way of fighting ability to gain mobility. New miniaturization techniques made room for everything--plasma cannons, interplanetary rocket engines, and in-flight fuel collection systems. This was truly an engineering marvel of its time.

@@Homicide
Our history is replete with examples of philosophies used to bad ends, and Vastness of Purpose is no exception. A leader who has not the greater good in mind can twist the tenets of this doctrine to provoke the less educated citizens to hatred of all things human. The destructive potential of the pack mentality that results was demonstrated clearly during the Beltronia riots, but some beings never learn. With our new ability to control the development of organisms, it is quite possible to create a creature designed specifically to prey on the fears and weaknesses of the human species. No citizen would do so, of course, unless driven to it by xenophobic paranoia.

@@Intelliraptor
The public outcry and furor that resulted when the development of the first Intelliraptor was announced surprised even the critics of the program. Evidently, this genetically engineered re-creation and improvement on the long-extinct Velociraptor dinosaur touched a hidden chord of irrational fear in many citizens. While it's true that these creatures have been given a vicious, clever intelligence far beyond their original dim wit (calling their instinctive pack behaviors "wolf-like" comes near to insulting the wolves), the developers also instilled in them an unswerving loyalty to home and tribe. Thus, these military units will act to defend their city even after it has been overrun by enemies. Problems have arisen when the rare escapee forms a wild tribe, but overall, the benefits certainly outweigh the occasional difficulty.

@@Interceptor
Even in space-based combat, the concepts of "fighter" and "bomber" are sometimes appropriate. Small, fast vessels intended primarily for an air to air role demand a different design from the larger, air to ground fighting craft. The Interceptor is a hybrid fighter; its sleek design allows use both out in space and deep in an atmosphere. As is the case with most fighting aircraft, the Interceptor uses fuel at a prodigious rate. Therefore, though it is a powerful military tool, its range is strictly limited.

@@Iron Maiden
The venerable Iron Maiden was the first functional design in the history of mechanized robotic war machines. This elementary model was heavily armored and more than a little graceless, but it made up for its coarse design with sheer firepower. When the first of these lurched onto the battlefield, there was nothing on the ground that could face its plasma cannons and survive. Though perfectly capable of functioning in space, this unit was designed before rocket transport was routinely built into MRWMs.

@@Ixion
Now that we have discovered them, circular supports (the human sound-cognate is "weelz") seem like the sort of thing one would invent at the very dawn of civilization. It is a testament to the vagaries of chance that we did not do so while still on our home world. Used on a vehicle, they allow much faster travel than the traditional sledge system, and for lesser cost of production. Three rolling supports seem to result in a stable configuration, and we have adopted that as the standard. Twin ballistic catapults mounted to the sides of the main cabin provide defensive and offensive capability.

@@Jury Rigger
Though robotic and mechanized warfare have been carried on for some time, it is only recently that the ecosphere defenders, raiders, and other barbarian groups have begun to use this technology. The Jury Rigger, though often cobbled together from stolen and salvaged parts, is nonetheless an extremely potent and dangerous war machine. The pilots chosen for these devices are frequently careless of life--even their own--and it shows in their tactics. The resultant brutality is often difficult for civilized forces to match and defeat. Jury Riggers have no independent ability for space travel, but they have been reported off-planet.

@@Kelpie
Sneaking along hidden beneath the water is not an honorable way to carry on warfare. However, not only the humans but even the other nests derived from the survivors of our own ship seem to have no compunctions over difficulties of honor. Thus, it is our duty to take every advantage we can gain in the struggle for survival on this new world. Our new aqueous sensing technologies allow us to build and navigate this vessel, which travels below water levels and is therefore difficult for enemy ships to discern.

@@Kineticore
After the development of the HohMann, MRWM designs began to experience a great deal of specialization. A prime example of this is the Kineticore, which has been described as a mating of giant battle robot and fighter jet. This unit was intended to fill an air to air role, so the resemblance to a fighter is not really surprising. The original idea behind this model was for a pre-orbital interceptor, on the theory that any other MRWM on a dedicated trajectory to orbit would be easy pickings for a fast moving weapons platform. Unfortunately, the success of that tactic relied too heavily on begin in the right place at the right time. Though it cannot shoot down units heading into space, it has no problem catching up to almost anything else.

@@Mediary
Leaders must communicate with one another. Unfortunately, all of our advanced devices for such work was destroyed in our landing here, and the specialists trained to the job did not survive. The re-development of pressurized speaking and listening devices allowed us to begin rebuilding the Mediary Corps. Though the equipment is primitive, Corps members can fulfill their basic functions--contact with other civilizations, honorable sabotage, theft of science, and subversion. As was the case in the past, a Mediary's communications devices also provide an atmosphere for work in unfriendly environments, like space.

@@Melior
Though the thought itself is painful, the needs of our society in the realm of environmental engineering have become more complex than the Nidus can handle. We must move on, and philosophy has shown us the path into the future. The newly developed Melior organism is a sac-bearer like our beloved Nidus, but it is much more, as well. This magnificent being does everything a Nidus can do--and twice as fast--and is also able to transform many types of terrain into other types--level mountains, drain swamps, and so on. In addition, the egg sac is more thoroughly hidden inside the Melior's body, which makes it less susceptible to destruction during an attack.

@@Ne Plus Ultra
Disintegration is perhaps the most ethically questionable weapons technology to arise since the fumbling, early days of nuclear fission and fusion on our far-off home planet. The Ne Plus Ultra is the purest form of disintegrator bomb. It is a compact, no nonsense device with only one purpose--travel to a military target and annihilate it--leaving absolutely nothing behind. Only the extraordinary Nucleon Shield, developed in response to the predictably unstoppable proliferation of disintegrator technology, can prevent the devastation this weapon would otherwise inflict on a city. No known military unit can withstand the effect.

No civilization can create Ne Plus Ultra devices until someone has completed the Penance Wonder of the World.

@@Nidus
It is only by the greatest fortune and the courageous sacrifice by the ship-borne Coercor forces that any of our hard working egg-breeders at all lived to reach the surface of this forsaken world. Without them, we would of course have perished completely. With them, we have hope for new nest cities, agriculture, refineries, transportation routes, and all that they traditionally provide. To date, the egg sacs have not been as healthy in color and firmness as they should be, but this is surely a temporary effect of the new environment. When we are better adapted to this planet and more securely established, the sacs will firm up and ripen as they should.

@@Ophion
In general, the forms of life native to Funestis are not hostile, but the higher forms are almost invariably so. As yet, there is no scientifically accepted reason for this, but several experts have speculated that the Funestian ecosystem has a built-in defense mechanism. When stressed by an exploitative species, especially an alien one (such as ourselves), the planetary ecology "fights back" with the uncaring brutality characteristic of nature everywhere. Theorists are divided on whether this is a natural trait or was engineered into each selected species by the original inhabitants of this world. Regardless, the Ophion worm is a prime example of this effect. The vicious, giant, burrowing creature remains underground until it chooses to attack--or someone unwittingly tries to move onto the land it occupies. It then erupts from the ground, strikes, and retreats. On occasion, an Ophion has been captured and trained, but systematic domestication has proven to be impossible.

@@Pasticcio
Many believe that the first public unveiling of the original Pasticcio heralded a new era in genetics--and ushered in the dawn of the Protean Age. While this might or might not be true, it is historical fact that the "patchwork soldier" was the first successful effort to join human, non-human, and robotic elements into a single being. (The word 'organism' does not seem appropriate.) Keep in mind that the Pasticcio was not a protean being; it had no form-changing abilities whatsoever. Rather, it provided sure evidence that the differing biologies could be conjoined, which led directly to the later protean advances. Before that time, the Pasticcio, which inherited the benefits of the three worlds--human, non-human, and machine--and few of the weaknesses, had proved itself on the battlefield. It was strong, tough, and able to survive in nearly any environment, no matter how hostile.

@@Pedipalpi
Since genetic science has evolved beyond what we remember from our home planet, it seems that oddity has become the norm. Still, the Pedipalpi--a gargantuan whip scorpion trained to carry a warrior--sort of stands out. With the combination of claws, tail, and hand-held weapons at their disposal, it's been said that with an experienced rider on board, a single one of these units could defeat a small army from twentieth century Earth. Transmutation technology not only allowed the creation of such a creature, but gave it an extra-tough, ceramic carbon polymer exoskeleton. Unfortunately, we made them strong and vigorous enough to frequently escape and thrive in the wild. Durable as they are, however, the Pedipalpi cannot survive in a vacuum.

@@Plasm
Even for those who created it, the Plasm is a nightmare come to life. In coarse terms, this unit is a gargantuan version of a common amoeba-like Funestian microorganism. It is huge and strong. Its pliable structure makes it nearly immune to physical attacks, and its thick cell wall prevents infection by most biological and chemical agents. If this unit has a weak point, it is its lack of intelligence--the Plasm is merely big and tough. It can carry no weapons, but its extensible pseudopod can batter even the heaviest-armored MRWMs beyond hope of repair.

@@Pristrix
Modern warfare seems to force our philosophies into areas of ethical theory that are decidedly indistinct--what the humans call "grey areas" of thought. The Pristrix is a product of this sort of theorizing--a naval military vessel that relies primarily on stealthy approach for its advantage. Quantronic engineers have designed flexible gravitational control fins that allow this rather large and dangerous vessel to prowl the water seas of Funestis, the dust "seas" of Naumachia, and the high-pressure gas "seas" of Nona. It cannot, however, travel in space; for one thing, there's nothing to hide beneath.

@@R.A.T.
Radioplastic-Armored Troopers (RATs) are a re-creation of military technology from pre-launch Earth. Human soldiers outfitted with personal armor built from advanced radioplastics are much more effective in combat and more difficult to defeat than their non-armored counterparts. Radioplastic armor is equipped with onboard life support and designed to protect its wearer from vacuum and the various dangerous radiations of deep space, so these units are perfectly suited to operations off-planet.

@@Raia
The Raia is the biological equivalent of a ground-effect vehicle, with the added benefit of a frictionless bottom surface. Derived from the cell line of a Funestian sea-ray, this creature is quite at home both over the ocean and over land. It is also capable of rising to a height well above any ground-based attacker's range. As is perhaps predictable when genetic artistry is so rampant in our culture, many labs are far from being as careful as they should be. Many Raia have found their way into the wild, to be trained and used by raiders, so-called "ecosphere defenders", and other barbarian elements. The sea of space is sufficiently different from seas of water so that this unit is far from spaceworthy, for which we should be grateful.

@@Repeller
It is a wise scientist who can learn from the lessons nature presents. Though we as uninvited interlopers on this planet have followed a different path to developing electromagnetic (E-M) repulsion field theory, one of the ways we have put it to use mimics the natural protective ability of certain native Funestian animals. The military unit thus created is the Repeller, so named because of the "repulsion" field surrounding its entire body. These fields are all-encompassing, so that these fighters must be identified by colored collars worn outside the field.

@@Rocket Man
Although it debuted at nearly the same time as the Iron Maiden, the Rocket Man was a differently specialized design of mechanized robotic war machine (MRWM). This early model was the first MRWM capable of traveling to and from orbit on its own power. Weight and aerodynamic considerations forced the engineers to sacrifice firepower and armor for speed and lift ability, so this unit is not the most powerful thing on the battlefield. However, the potential for exploration the Rocket Man provides more than makes up for its lack of military might. Perhaps the only other significant drawback is the unit's sub-standard navigational system, because of which it is incapable of naval travel.

@@Salmagundy
One of the most effective ways to compile information about an enemy (or potential enemy) is by infiltrating the enemy's ranks. This is the job of the spy, and the Salmagundy is a perfect spy. This melange of human and non-human genetic coding is able to change appearance at will, collect information on any enemy, seek out dissidents and defectors in their forces and cities, steal technology, sabotage both military units and population centers, and (if the technology exists) plant incredibly destructive devices in enemy cities. As counterintelligence operatives stationed in friendly cities, they can also feed false information to enemy spies and prevent attempts at subversion. Even the strange species we have encountered on this foreign world seem to find espionage distasteful. However, the potential benefits generally outweigh the risk of incident.

@@Shuttle
Thanks to the development of both the ground-based launch technology and the massive engine power necessary for reaching High Funestis Orbit (HFO), the Shuttle is the first military transport unit capable of reaching orbit on its own power. This naval vessel travels the watery seas of Funestis as easily as it does the "sea" of space. Launch engineers must be wary however, of the huge orbital platforms we have discovered through telescopic surveys; they are a great threat to any space ship, and travel to orbit is prohibited from any area directly beneath a platform. The Shuttle was originally designed as a fighting craft, so its passenger capacity is rather limited.

@@Skimmer
In the odd low-gravity environment of Naumachia, the "oceans" are, essentially, giant bowls of suspended dust. Most naval vessels are intended for use on seas of water, and are thus completely inappropriate to this milieu. The Skimmer is a wide, low, flat bottomed "boat" that takes advantage of friction reduction technology to allow it to skim over the dust. There is a small, extremely lightweight passenger cabin, and specially miniaturized plasma weapons are generally mounted on the bow. This vessel was designed for a specific use, and is useless anywhere but on the dust seas of Naumachia.

@@Skipjack
In their starship's original data bank were the designs for nearly every type of ship ever sailed by humans. Though all of that was irrevocably lost in the fiery reentry, some of the colonists and crew came onboard with actual sailing experience. Once the required technology was rediscovered and local resources developed that allowed shipbuilding, it wasn't long before these individuals pooled their knowledge and recreated the Skipjack. This ancient American vessel has a single mast (sloop rig), and is defined by its v-shaped bottom and prominent chines. On the sea, it's recognizable by its broad, transom stern and clipper stem. The Funestian Skipjack is commonly armed with light cannon, and despite its small size can be a nimble and formidable opponent.

@@Speed Demon
To quote Marshal al-Sabah, "An advance in genetics is an advance in weapons design." The first success from the Advanced HyperKinetic Organisms Project, commonly known as the Speed Demon, is a case in point. This totally organic being is built for speed--literally. It's the fastest ground-based military unit ever to exist. Imagine an intelligent greyhound the size of a horse, with stronger legs and extensible claws for added traction. Note that this creature was designed to remain viable in the space environment; its mouth, ears, nostrils, and other openings are completely self-sealing, and it is able to generate an internal oxygen supply at need.

@@Sting
The quantronic monopole missile is a sleek and graceful design, and its destructive potential is quite impressive. In fact, no known military force is able to withstand an assault by even a small number of these devices. Add to that the fact that they are remotely piloted--there is no risk to any friendly soldier's life--and you have a weapon that is very attractive to military leaders. Unfortunately, it has not been so well received by the general public. The popular feeling seems to be that this is an unethical and overly destructive device, and that no reasonable leader would care to build it, much less use it.

@@Transceratops
This is not simply a genetically engineered re-creation of the extinct Triceratops dinosaur. Rather, the Transceratops is an improvement on the original, equipped by our genetic developers with a rudimentary intelligence greater than that of the domesticated dogs of Earth. Beside being trained never to injure a human being, "Topsies" are loyal to a fault. Though they're not intelligent enough to become rebellious, most are smart enough to follow orders. In this way at least, they're perfect for military purposes.

@@Typhoeus
It is an unlikely coincidence that every intelligent species we have so far encountered has in its legends something akin to the dragons of ancient myth. Despite many efforts, some undertaken by the most expert genetic artists using the most sophisticated equipment, it proved impossible to re-create these monsters until the development of a practical theory of chaos biogenics. (Some legends hint that the dragons have always been creatures with chaotic natures.) The first and, for many reasons, the last design is modeled on Typhoeus of ancient Greek myth. However, though fiery serpent's eyes and a terrifying voice were easy enough, no one had the courage to actually create a flying creature this powerful with a hundred heads. Once born, the Typhoeus is willful, and will not submit easily to being disbanded.

@@Urdar
Little or nothing is known about the Urdar. Though we have given them a name (that of the first Norn, one of the earliest personifications of Fate), we do not even know if they are organisms, creatures, beings, or simply devices. What is certain is that they roam the planet Nona, and the evidence indicates that they were created in the time when the HaGibborim still inhabited that world. These units are brutally violent, as if protecting the secrets of that long-disappeared race, and seem to be well nigh indestructible--especially since they hover high above most of our units. The Urdar come and go as they choose, and they're almost undoubtedly capable of interplanetary travel.

@@Ur-Titan
The most ancient mythology from our species' days on Earth is filled with titans, giants, and superhuman beings. Our genetic artists have long been able to create huge organisms, but these wondrous legendary personages had more than size going for them. With the discovery of total immunity, we can finally return to the infancy of our species and re-create our titans, exempt from disease, poison, age, and physical infirmities of every kind. Strong and fast as they are big, the Ur-Titans are formidable forces. The ground shudders where they walk. There has been no need to develop titanic weaponry; the Ur-Titan needs no weapons but fists.

@@Vector Morbus
International watchdog groups have already begun protesting the development of this specialized organism. The Vector Morbus is an engineered reptile that secretes a highly corrosive mixture of rapidly mutating protoviruses in its pestilential sacs. This "obscene cloud of death" as it has been referred to in press accounts is quite effective at destroying enemy military forces. Unfortunately, the long-standing prejudice against chemical and biological weapons (the Vector Morbus is both) makes its deployment problematic.

@@Xenocide
Euthenics, the science of making the universe better for humans, has had many positive results. However, like many scientific advances, it has also caused some unattractive side-effects. A less than ethically upright leader can evoke the principles of Euthenics in carefully worded speeches and public pronouncements in order to rile up the more gullible citizens and influence them to form unofficial militias; "lynch mob" is the more precise term. These agitated citizens will then go out at any implied instruction from their leader, seek out enemies of the state--especially members of alien species--and kill them. Although these paramilitary units can be useful when a nation is opposed by an alien civilization, some believe that when it comes to arousing nationalistic species hatred, the cure is worse than the disease.

@@Yare
A Yare, though little more than a huge raft with a square sail, is nonetheless a practical seagoing vessel. After all, the Polynesians of ancient Earth traveled the vast Pacific in lesser boats, and were accomplished explorers. The one caveat is that the Yare is less than safe in open ocean; staying within sight of the coast is the best way to avoid the sort of storms that can easily destroy such a simple vessel. A small deck catapult provides some defense against raiders, but hurled missiles have never been known to affect wind and rain.

@@Singulon
Armor manufactured with monopolium is virtually impenetrable. It is also extremely massive, and therefore heavy, and only precise control of local gravitational forces makes it possible for even a protean being to wear it and survive. This armor, while protecting the soldier inside, is also a weapon in and of itself. Merely the stomp of a monoskin armored foot is enough to set off a localized earthquake. The weakness of this suit is merely the weakness of the organism inside--it must breathe through a mask, and the mask cannot be composed of monoskin. According to theory, if we somehow produce enough monopolium (and the required amount is not impossibly large), we will have concentrated the entire mass of the known universe in one small area. Theorists are still arguing over the possible cosmic consequences of that.

@TERRAIN_AND_RESOURCE_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@TERRAIN_INDEX
38,			; Salt Flats
33,			; Prairie
19,			; Graminiae
7,			; Burning Trees
16,			; Foothills
24,			; Mountains
47,			; Tundra
32,			; Polar
46,			; The Willies
0,			; Acid Shallows
28,			; Ocean
50,			; Artifacts
54,			; Closbeast
68,			; Huisca
89,			; Sparkbags
86,			; Ruins
48,			; Adnausium Ore
95,			; Thalarctos
85,			; Relics
81,			; Picus
84,			; Razor Beast
65,			; Fiah
70,			; Interzona
98,			; Vertida
-1,			; Huisca
82,			; Quench Fruit
83,			; Rare Earths
51,			; Bauxite
79,			; Pachyloumis
69,			; Ice Worms
103,			; Yellow Willies
67,			; Gracklings
49,			; Algae Mats
37,			; Rust
29,			; Old Platform
2,			; Ancient Platform
17,			; Framework
8,			; Conduit
39,			; Scaffolding
6,			; Beacon
9,			; Corrosion
30,			; Orbiting Platform
4,			; Archaic Platform
41,			; Space
64,			; Exposed Wiring
100,			; Water Generator
85,			; Relics
94,			; Supply Pod
60,			; Discharge
100,			; Water Generator
85,			; Relics
64,			; Exposed Wiring
100,			; Water Generator
50,			; Artifacts
61,			; Diffuse Plasma
72,			; Leakage
87,			; Salvage
50,			; Artifacts
92,			; Supply Crate
93,			; Supply Pack
91,			; Supply Box
88,			; Scrap
72,			; Leakage
87,			; Salvage
50,			; Artifacts
57,			; Debris
10,			; Craters
31,			; Permafrost
5,			; Bare Rock
11,			; Crystal Forest
42,			; Spikes
21,			; Impalers
45,			; Sulci
20,			; Ices
43,			; Stone
34,			; Ridges
13,			; Dust Bowl
73,			; Lode
59,			; Deposits
78,			; Ores
71,			; Keening Tree
58,			; Delerium (116)
62,			; Endolithic Algae
74,			; Minerals
101,			; Water Ice
78,			; Ores
74,			; Minerals
52,			; Bunnies
97,			; Unearthed Artifacts
73,			; Lode
59,			; Deposits
76,			; Monopoles
62,			; Endolithic Algae
58,			; Delerium (116)
74,			; Minerals
66,			; Frozen Artifacts
78,			; Ores
74,			; Minerals
75,			; Mites
23,			; Metallic Hydrogen
18,			; Gasbag
40,			; Solid Hydrogen
1,			; Ancient Hall
3,			; Ancient Room
44,			; Storm
25,			; Ammonia
26,			; Hydrogen
15,			; Eidolon
22,			; Leviathana
27,			; Methane
55,			; Conduits
99,			; Vetch
80,			; Pictoglyphs
56,			; Corrosion
63,			; Enigmatic Device
90,			; Stable Cyclone
102,			; Water Vapor
102,			; Water Vapor
53,			; City in Stasis
99,			; Vetch
102,			; Water Vapor
55,			; Conduits
99,			; Vetch
80,			; Pictoglyphs
50,			; Artifacts
77,			; Mysterious Thing
90,			; Stable Cyclone
76,			; Monopoles
76,			; Monopoles
96,			; Time Bubble
99,			; Vetch
76,			; Monopoles
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Acid Shallows
In low lying regions with a heavy annual rainfall, swampy areas predominate. On Funestis, these marshy conditions often coincide with territory where the pH of the subsoil is severely acidic. The geological causes of these vast subterranean deposits of acidic earth are not yet fully understood, but the result is obvious on the surface. Acid Shallows is the accepted name for any swamp-like area of extremely acidic, shallow water in which almost nothing grows. This terrain is not totally useless, but it is limited to a meager food output and what little data can be gleaned from studying the local ecology. Most military units cannot travel onto or through these areas without significant losses, and therefore are almost universally forbidden to do so.

@@Ancient Hall
Our xenologists label these gargantuan structures "hallways" for lack of a better description. We actually have no evidence of how these areas were used by the ancient platform builders--the race our xeno-archaeologists have named the Ha'Gibborim. What we do know is that the walls and floors of these "halls" are composed of solid, nonmetallic hydrogen, stabilized in shape by advanced technology beyond our capabilities. They are devoid of decoration and have proven difficult to travel over. Experience has shown that these areas are of no use for food production, but the rewards for studying their structure are great. The solid hydrogen can frequently be scavenged for building materials, as well.

@@Ancient Platform
Materials dating techniques clearly establish these areas as the oldest of all the sections of platform in orbit around Funestis. Conversely, they are also among the best preserved. Whatever long-ago culture built these giant structures, their engineering prowess seems to have gone through alternating cycles of quality workmanship and shoddy construction. Without more information, however, any hypotheses as to what factors could have contributed to this decline and resurgence are pure speculation. We do know that the oldest platforms are manufactured from carbon fiber polyresinous alloys similar to those used in advanced spacecraft like the one that got us here. We can extract some materiel from this and even a little food, but without improvement, this type of platform provides more data than anything else.

@@Ancient Room
Like the "hallways" they resemble, these regions have been labeled "rooms" simply for lack of a better description; we have no more evidence for these areas' intended use than we do for the halls. As with the structure of nearly every platform in the atmosphere of Nona, the Ha'Gibborim rooms were formed out of solidified, nonmetallic hydrogen. There are theories as to how they accomplished this, but at the time of this writing, even a proof of principle experiment is somewhat beyond our capabilities. Though everything in each room is visible (and therefore accumulating data on these areas is easy and rewarding), few units are able to enter, much less traverse, these regions. Using unpowered equipment (fishing line, mostly), scavenging parties have some success pulling out salvage materials, but none of our machinery functions inside the boundaries of these areas--including life support suits. Obviously, these areas are of no use for food production.

@@Archaic Platform
Dating of these platforms places them in the so-called "interregnum" period between the two peaks of quality engineering evident in the archaeological record on Funestis. If, as some theorists speculate, the two known cycles of high technology followed by a massive decline in workmanship represent the rise and fall of two distinct empires (perhaps even two separate species), then these regions would have been built during the collapse of the First Empire. The artifacts found here are the same as those on the more ancient platforms, but the underlying structure has generally not held up as well to the ravages of time. Thankfully, the carbon fiber polyresinous alloys used in the oldest platforms are still the majority material in these structures, so we can extract the same amounts of materiel, food, and data.

@@Bare Rock
On tectonically quiet planets with little or no atmosphere, no liquid water, and minimal native life, there are few mechanical processes for breaking rock down into dust and soil. Over millions of years, however, the slow but constant bombardment by meteorites is enough to cover much of a planet's surface with craters, dust, and other ejecta. On worlds like this, areas of bare rock are sometimes untouched primeval surface, but more often these smooth, flat areas are the result of molten rock welling up from underground and solidifying. The dark maria on Earth's moon are believed to have originated in this way. We have yet to catch this molten rock in the act of welling up, so what causes it to do so is still a matter for theorists. Some of the leading possibilities are: an unusually large meteorite impact, the gravitational stresses of a near miss with a large body, and heat left over from the planet's formation causing rare internally generated quakes. Whatever their origin, these areas are poor ground for farming, but well suited for production of materiel.

@@Beacon
As is true of all the structures we've discovered on the ancient alien platforms in orbit around Funestis, we can only speculate on the intended use for these. Leading xeno-technologists have categorized the vast colored lights in these areas as communication devices, possibly for signaling to ships docking with the platforms. Study is made extremely difficult, however, by the violent effect the devices themselves have on the electrical and nervous systems of any being or machine that ventures too near. Research continues, and the data pours in. In the mean time, some brave settlers have managed to grow meager crops in the safe areas between the lights. Large scale cultivation is out of the question, however.

@@Burning Trees
Nature has provided every known organism with a method of reproduction. In the case of the Funestian burning tree, she has taken a somewhat violent tack. During the spring season, each tree in these vast, thick forests grows a multitude of hard seed pods. In summer, a large fruit, ranging in color from red to orange, grows on certain ones. (Botanists are still not sure how a grove chooses which tree will bear fruit.) At the end of summer, when all the trees are driest, the "sparkbag" fruit detonates, starting a forest fire. The size and spread of these fires is quite limited; it's not enough to destroy the stand of trees, but the heat is sufficient to activate the seeds in each pod and explode the pods themselves, scattering seeds into the wind for miles. Unfortunately, these ecosystems are somewhat fragile, and "improvement" destroys them.

@@Conduit
Not only are large sections of the platforms unfinished or partially dismantled, but there are regions where this has resulted in the exposure of portions of the vast power grid that once supplied energy to these enormous orbital facilities. Our understanding of the power source is still incomplete, but scientists have managed to tap into some of the still functioning conduits. This energy allows us to set up hydroponic farms and get a significant food supply from the terrain. In addition, the data we are accumulating from these open books on the ancient technology is substantial. Unfortunately, painful experience has taught us that any attempts to further cultivate the area or to dismantle the conduits for materiel is futile.

@@Corrosion
The chemical processes that can corrode even the toughest materials proceed inexorably even in space. Although a section of platform might encounter only one or two or these reactive molecules a year, over the course of millennia, the damage builds up. Add to that the pinhole punctures caused by micro-meteorite impacts, and you have a significant amount of corrosion over time. These areas, however, show much more damage than is consistent with gradual aging. Evidence from particle analysis suggests that whatever inhabited these platforms stored highly reactive substances--some of them radioactive--in certain regions, and that the corrosion in these areas was probably caused by the slow release of those compounds over time. These areas are useless for food production unless cultivated; they're better used as a source of refined materiel.

@@Craters
When a disk of gas and dust surrounding a newborn star condenses to form planets, there is always plenty of material left over to make innumerable smaller things--comets, asteroids, moons, and other objects. Over millions of years, most of the larger of these are drawn by gravity into stable orbits, but the smallest objects are more likely to just collide with larger bodies, like planets. An atmosphere can offer some protection to a planet; friction with the air burns up most of the smaller meteors. No matter how thick the atmosphere, however, there are always a few meteors large enough or dense enough to make it through. When one of these meteorites hits ground, the impact creates a big hole--a crater. On Naumachia, which has very little in the way of an atmosphere, craters are common. Individual ones range in size from tiny pinholes to giants that stretch kilometers in diameter. Where a meteorite has hit, the top layer of the planet's crust--the regolith--is often exposed. This sometimes leaves valuable mineral deposits uncovered and easy to access.

@@Crystal Forest
Long the subject of speculation and fantasy, "forests" of tree-like crystalline structures actually exist in the low gravity environment on Naumachia. These beautiful crystal networks are not, of course, living organisms in the same sense that trees are; rather, they are the result of well-understood patterns of crystal growth. Though wondrous to see, these trees are also sharp, and safe travel through these areas is slow. Do not rush into battle near them, either, as they provide a reliable source of cover for any defender. It should go without saying that food production is impossible without first destroying the crystals. It is possible to extract some useful materials from the land, and study of the forests themselves is a rich source of data.

@@Currents
On Nona, there are (of course) no rivers as we know them. Liquid water might exist at some depth where the pressure and temperature are perfectly balanced, but on the surface, it is far too cold. There are, however, certain stable currents of hydrogen gas that move over the solid terrain. These wispy streams are mostly hydrogen, but they also contain helium and a number of other useful gasses. Using the ambient hydrocarbons (methane and so on) for extra fuel allows nearly any unit to move more quickly when traveling along one of these streams.

@@Dust Bowl
The name of this planet, Naumachia, is derived from a Latin term meaning "false sea". Early explorers were baffled by this planet's dry lakes of floating dust, and it wasn't until the first scientific expedition landed that they got answers. Evidently, the gravity on this small world is just low enough that the combination of electrostatic charges (generated by frictional collisions between the tiny dust particles) and Brownian motion is enough to keep the majority of the miniscule motes suspended indefinitely, but the gravity is high enough to for the most part confine these clouds of dirt to the lowland areas. Dry or not, these seas, like any other, have dangerous currents and will drown the unwary. Only specially developed vessels can travel these "seas" safely.

@@Dust Runs
In a convergence of structural evolution that is as oddly beautiful as it is strange, the suspended dust that fills the "seas" of Naumachia is replenished by downhill flows that resemble rivers. Early survey teams found that these Dust Runs conceal smooth, easily traversed ground; geologists suspect that the action of friction over hundreds of years has ground down the rough edges of the rock beneath the dust. This grinding has also revealed some of the underlying strata, giving our researchers easy access to extra geo-historical data.

@@Eidolon
The Eidolists are an odd bunch. Though many of its members are respected researchers in their own fields, none of them are recognized authorities in any of the xenologic sciences. This group claims to have discovered the key to the Ha'Gibborim pictoglyphic language, and to have deciphered many of the ancient texts. The followers of this cultish "science" tell the legend of the Ha'Gibborim home city, Eidolon. When the fall of the Ha'Gibborim empire was upon them, so the story goes, the leaders of this most powerful city in the system recognized that their fate was unavoidable and set in motion a plan to preserve the city, though without its population. The city of Eidolon was evacuated, sealed in a time-static bubble, and intentionally sunk deep into the clouds of Nona. It rests there to this day, with all its ultra-high Ha'Gibborim technology intact, waiting to be uncovered and exploited. Responsible experts conclude that this is simply a myth born of wishful thinking.

@@Foothills
Rolling, elevated areas of countryside, often found between plains and more mountainous regions, are known as Foothills. These areas are often covered with rich soil eroded from nearby peaks, which can support lush grasses and forests. Foothills are relatively rich in resources, and are great places to set up a refinery. In areas where the below-ground resources are scarce, hill areas are often cultivated for agricultural purposes. Most crops thrive in these regions, given the proper climate.

@@Framework
We can only guess at the real purpose served by this overwhelming network of orbital platforms, but one thing that is clear is that its residents abandoned it in haste. There are large areas of these structures that seem to have been partially dismantled, presumably for maintenance or repair work, and then left that way. These regions are good sources of both raw materials and data, as parts of the exposed infrastructure are easily scavenged and returned to our labs for analysis.

@@Gasbag
Ever since the nature of gas giant planets was discovered, imaginative people have speculated on the type of life that might evolve to survive and thrive in such an unusual environment. After our experience in the rest of this planetary system, explorers were not surprised to find that plant life had established itself on Nona. What was unexpected, however, was the extent to which the vegetable matter had spread--and its size. What early survey parties called "gas bags" are in fact Lycoperdon Leviathana, the largest species of basidiomycetous fungus ever observed. The "terrain" in these regions is actually just the topmost parts, the visible portion of these immense spore pods.

@@Graminiae
Areas of mild climate and fertile earth are often covered by vast forests. Where trees have not taken hold (or have been cleared), we find regions overrun with native grasses--scientific name "graminiae"--and other types of low vegetation. On a typical planet, these areas are characterized by marked wet and dry seasons, with annual periods of drought. These grassy lands are easily cultivated and used as pastures and grazing lands for herd animals. Because of the relatively low rainfall in these regions, the topsoil is high in nutrients. Areas of graminiae are well suited for growing crops, especially grain crops.

@@Ices
Every planet with a rotational axis near the plane of the ecliptic has polar caps, areas that receive less sunlight than the rest of the globe and which, therefore, never (or rarely) melt. The typical polar cap is a huge mass of ice and snow, but this ice is not necessarily frozen water. What freezes at the north and south poles depends on the chemical makeup of the planet's atmosphere and seas; water, carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia, and even more exotic gases have all been found frozen on some planet somewhere. All polar regions have one trait in common; they are inhospitable places, containing little life and virtually no resources of any kind. Only researchers can benefit--from studying the often strange ecology of these extreme climates.

@@Impalers
On low mass planets with miniscule gravity, there is rarely enough air (atmosphere) or liquid water (hydrosphere) for the processes of wind and runoff to cause any significant erosion. Thus, whatever mountainous peaks are raised--by geologic processes or meteorite impacts--tend to remain exactly as sheer, steep, sharp, and high as they are when formed. Combine this with the bleak sharpness of shadows on an airless world, and the vista of a chain of spiky peaks becomes an awe-inspiring spectacle--and a nearly impassable barrier to travel, as well.

@@Leviathana
Ever since the nature of gas giant planets was discovered, imaginative people have speculated on the type of life that might evolve to survive and thrive in such an unusual environment. After our experience in the rest of this planetary system, explorers were not surprised to find that plant life had established itself on Nona. What was unexpected, however, was the extent to which the vegetable matter had spread--and its size. What early survey parties called "gas bags" are in fact Lycoperdon Leviathana, the largest species of basidiomycetous fungus ever observed. The "terrain" in these regions is actually just the topmost parts, the visible portion of these immense spore pods.

@@Metallic Hydrogen
Studies carried out from orbit suggest that the core of Nona is a solid chunk of iron and silicates, and that this core is surrounded by a double layer of liquid hydrogen. The outer half of this layer is typical of liquid hydrogen, but the deeper half is metallic--the element is under such pressure that it goes through a phase transition and acts like a metal. Though we have no evidence for it, a popular theory holds that the ancient residents of this world somehow mined the core of the planet for metallic hydrogen, then by some technology we do not yet understand, converted it into a stable, solid form without losing its metallic properties. That solid, metallic form of the lightest element in the universe is what makes up the vast platforms on which we landed.

@@Mountains
On any planet, mountains are areas of high elevation, running the gamut from solitary peaks to rugged chains that can make up the backbones of continents. On tectonically active planets, most mountains are formed when the plates that make up the crust impact or slide below one another, raising layers of rock above the surrounding land. Mountains can also be formed by volcanic action, or through the erosion of softer rock from around a hard core. Although they generally offer poor agricultural prospects, mountains are often a source of great mineral wealth, especially when the raw ore is processed and refined. Aside from their economic value, mountains provide a natural defensive barrier, shielding settlements from invaders.

@@Ammonia
In the atmosphere of all known gas giant planets, convection is king. Nona is no exception. Heat generated in the heart of the planet warms the denser gasses, and the warmed "air" rises. When it reaches the upper regions of cloud, this air cools, and the complex gasses--ammonia among them--precipitate out as icy crystals. Some of the highest, coldest, and brightest clouds are filled with highly reflective ammonia.

@@Hydrogen
As far as we have been able to ascertain, the great majority of the atoms in the universe are hydrogen atoms. Hydrogen is the main constituent of most stars and of the disks of gas from which planets condense. Therefore, it is not surprising that the largest planets--the gas giants--are primarily made up of hydrogen. There is convincing evidence that this simplest of all elements exists in both solid and liquid forms in the dense regions of Nona, but what we see on the surface is gas. Hydrogen is the lightest element of all, and therefore it makes sense that the hydrogen in a planet would rise to the surface, while other, heavier compounds sink to form layers inside the giant planet.

@@Methane
The convection currents that lift ammonia to the top of a gas giant's atmosphere have a down side, too. After the rising clouds have cooled and the trace gasses have precipitated out, the cold "air" then moves away (to make room for more rising gas) and sinks back toward the center of the planet. Areas where the atmosphere is sinking are much more transparent than other zones, and the complex chemical mix beneath the top layer shows through. On Nona, this allows an observer to see the methane layer, but spectral analysis has also revealed areas of ammonium hydrosulphide, water vapor, and phosphine.

@@Ocean
The oceans and seas of any planet are the most likely place for life to spring up, and Funestis is no exception. Her dark waters are home to millions of life forms, ranging in size from microscopic plankton analogs to the Monstrodon, the largest and most dangerous native life form yet discovered. The animals and plants that inhabit the sea provide an excellent source of food, and offshore mineral deposits can contribute to the industry in a city.

@@Old Platform
Despite the fact that any theory of Funestian history is purely speculative at this point, the terminology derived from the most popular timeline has become standard. Thus, these regions have come to be known as "Early Second Empire" platforms. They were built during a time when technology and quality construction were at a peak, and thus these structures have endured the centuries better than many of the newer sections. For example, they show none of the torn welds or the circular "plasma rot" holes that plague other platforms. Strengthening the two empire hypothesis is the fact that the remnants found on these areas show no commonality with those of older sites. Even the materials are different. The structure of the platform is similar, but the carbon fiber polyresinous alloys are absent, replaced by cross-tensioned metallic weaves overlaid around ceramic polymer reinforcement rods. We gain more materiel from this type of platform than from the older ones and the same amount of data, but we get no food at all without cultivation.

@@Orbiting Platform
Although these regions are the youngest of all the different types of platform in orbit around Funestis, they are also in the worst state of disrepair. According to the prevailing hypothetical timeline, these are "Late Second Empire" structures, built when the second major culture on Funestis was in decline. This was, some speculate, during or immediately preceding the time of whatever event or situation caused the ancient ones' complete disappearance from this planet. The shoddy workmanship allows us to extract materiel easily, and the mistakes in the engineering give clues to the techniques used. These areas provide no food, however, unless intentionally cultivated.

@@Permafrost
The non-polar areas of cold planets, like Mars, are not always as dry as they seem. Water is often "stored" below the surface in vast volumes of Permafrost--ordinary soil generously laced with frozen water, carbon dioxide, and other ices. This frozen soil prevents root plants from getting a foothold, but does not inhibit the growth of surface colonies of fungi, molds, mosses, and the like. Modern methods of agriculture can sometimes eke out small crops from this type of land, but mining for water has proven to be by far the more rewarding enterprise.

@@Polar
Every planet with a rotational axis near the plane of the ecliptic has polar caps, areas that receive less sunlight than the rest of the globe and which, therefore, never (or rarely) melt. The typical polar cap is a huge mass of ice and snow, but this ice is not necessarily frozen water. What freezes at the north and south poles depends on the chemical makeup of the planet's atmosphere and seas; water, carbon dioxide, methane, ammonia, and even more exotic gases have all been found frozen on some planet somewhere. All polar regions have one trait in common; they are inhospitable places, containing little life and virtually no resources of any kind. Only researchers can benefit--from studying the often strange ecology of these extreme climates.

@@Prairie
Prairies are vast, open tracts of land with very few trees. For many reasons, only hardy vegetation such as brush and various grasses find a hold in these regions. A prairie is not unlike graminiae, except that the topsoil is simply not as well suited for growing most types of food plants. However, there are often moderate deposits of minerals in these regions--not enough to make refining profitable, however. The indigenous plants of the prairie make them well suited for grazing, and large herds of native fauna often make their living roaming such areas. With the proper cultivation, a prairie can easily be transformed into adequate farmland for the production of grains and the raising of livestock.

@@Ridges
On any planet, areas comprised of a series of low ridges like grooves or folds are referred to as sulci. (Each groove is a sulcus.) In photos taken from space, these areas resemble waves or sand dunes, though they are in most cases much too large to be noticeable at ground level, except perhaps as wide, rolling hills. The moons of both Jupiter and Saturn show sulci. Planetary geologists are not yet confident that they can explain by what processes these wavy zones form, but ground analyses have proven that whatever the cause, the buckled crust often brings subterranean deposits of useful minerals nearer the surface.

@@Rifts
One of the ways that we know these orbital platforms are far older than any civilization currently extant on Funestis is the state of disrepair. Jagged rifts, some of them running long distances, have appeared over the millennia, probably caused by coincidental accumulation of micrometeorite damage in certain areas. Though you might expect that these ragged tears would hamper travel, the opposite is in fact true. In the sometimes disorienting free fall environment, any path is an aid to navigation. These breaks in the structure also allow us to study the internal workings of the platforms, which supplies additional data.

@@River
Fed by natural springs, snow melt, and small tributary streams, rivers flow from mountains and other upland sources into larger rivers, lakes, and oceans. Rivers can be found in almost any terrain, from the wettest to the most arid. Since the beginning of recorded time, towns and cities have grown up around rivers, because the land in river valleys is usually very fertile and well-suited for farming. In addition, a river provides easy and quick access between towns for trade and travel. Water can be channeled from rivers for the purposes of irrigation. Rivers are also good sources of mineral resources, and can provide power to run machinery and generate electrical energy.

@@Rust
Given enough time, the process of oxidation affects nearly any structure--even in space. The amount of rust found in some areas of the orbital platforms is a testament to their incredible age. It is also suggestive evidence that earlier inhabitants might have maintained an oxygen atmosphere on the platforms--at least in selected regions. How this might have been accomplished is unknown, but research is continuing. In the mean time, take note that these areas are useless for food production unless cultivated; they're better used as a source of refined materiel.

@@Salt Flats
Just as is true on Earth, most of the large bodies of water on Funestis are salt water. Over long spans of time, the movement of continents can cause new oceans to spring up, and old ones can become landlocked. Trapped in this way, shallow seas and lakes sometimes evaporate, leaving behind great expanses of dry, salty soil in which very little plant life can survive. These extremely flat areas are useless for agriculture, but provide some interesting data.

@@Scaffolding
Whatever the intended purpose was of the extensive network of platforms in orbit around Funestis, it is obvious that the work was left unfinished. Strewn throughout the structures are vast regions that were clearly abandoned in haste mid-construction. Whether this means that these platforms were never used, which seems unlikely, or simply that whoever built them was constantly making additions and upgrades, we will likely never know for sure. What we do know is that these areas are good sources of raw materials, as the construction crews left unused building supplies spread around their workplaces.

@@Solid Hydrogen
We know from analysis of orbital and seismic data that the core of Nona is probably a solid chunk of iron and silicates. That core is surrounded by a liquid hydrogen outer core in two layers. The deeper of these layers is metallic, but the upper layer, which is under slightly less pressure, is not. The evidence is all circumstantial, but many scientists believe that the ancient Ha'Gibborim residents of Nona somehow mined the outer core of the planet for liquid hydrogen, then by some technology we do not yet understand, converted it into a stable, solid form without allowing it to take on metallic properties. Great regions of these immense platforms are composed of this solid.

@@Space
Despite the popular image, space is not empty. Especially in the volume near a star, the near-vacuum of space courses with energy, fields, particles, atoms, molecules, dust, and micro-meteoroids. Though most of these occur in amounts that are unnoticeable without special sensory devices, a suitably equipped outpost could not only detect but easily collect and analyze the things that fill "empty" space. While it's true that the minute amounts of physical debris would never constitute cost-effective resources for industry, it is quite possible to harvest the solar energy that literally streams out from the central star.

@@Spikes
On low mass planets with miniscule gravity, there is rarely enough air (atmosphere) or liquid water (hydrosphere) for the processes of wind and runoff to cause any significant erosion. Thus, whatever mountainous peaks are raised--by geologic processes or meteorite impacts--tend to remain exactly as sheer, steep, sharp, and high as they are when formed. Combine this with the bleak sharpness of shadows on an airless world, and the vista of a chain of spiky peaks becomes an awe-inspiring spectacle--and a nearly impassable barrier to travel, as well.

@@Stone
On tectonically quiet planets with little or no atmosphere, no liquid water, and minimal native life, there are few mechanical processes for breaking rock down into dust and soil. Over millions of years, however, the slow but constant bombardment by meteorites is enough to cover much of a planet's surface with craters, dust, and other ejecta. On worlds like this, areas of bare rock are sometimes untouched primeval surface, but more often these smooth, flat areas are the result of molten rock welling up from underground and solidifying. The dark maria on Earth's moon are believed to have originated in this way. We have yet to catch this molten rock in the act of welling up, so what causes it to do so is still a matter for theorists. Some of the leading possibilities are: an unusually large meteorite impact, the gravitational stresses of a near miss with a large body, and heat left over from the planet's formation causing rare internally generated quakes. Whatever their origin, these areas are poor ground for farming, but well suited for production of materiel.

@@Storm
On gas giant planets, high-altitude convection storms can cover areas larger than the surface of the Earth and last for centuries. The Great Red Spot of Jupiter is the most prominent and well known example of this phenomenon. While the exact mechanism by which these gargantuan cloud formations are generated is not entirely clear, we know that they often reach deep into the planet's atmosphere and churn up volatile gasses not normally found in the visible portions near the surface. The wind shear near the edges of these storms is so great that no known material can survive the crossing; units simply cannot travel into a storm area.

@@Sulci
On any planet, areas comprised of a series of low ridges like grooves or folds are referred to as sulci. (Each groove is a sulcus.) In photos taken from space, these areas resemble waves or sand dunes, though they are in most cases much too large to be noticeable at ground level, except perhaps as wide, rolling hills. The moons of both Jupiter and Saturn show sulci. Planetary geologists are not yet confident that they can explain by what processes these wavy zones form, but ground analyses have proven that whatever the cause, the buckled crust often brings subterranean deposits of useful minerals nearer the surface.

@@The Willies
The Willies is best described by the admittedly misleading term "haunted swamp." These marshy regions are infested with members of an unusually large plant species known variously as Willies, Indigo Willies, and Dark Willies. These are among the most bizarre vegetable forms known to science. Early in its development, a typical Willie is a fast growing swamp grass. In extremely rare cases, as yet undefined environmental pressures cause one of two transformations. A single Willie out of a group becomes either a semi-sentient flowering plant--a Yellow Willie--or a fully sentient, mobile creature with an extremely violent nature--a Blue Willie. Even in the indigo form, however, these plants are dangerous. They can temporarily convert to a semi-mobile form capable of attacking and paralyzing larger organisms--which then drown. Small survey parties do not often arouse the creatures, and we are able to harvest a fair amount of data from these areas. However, any attempts at improving the terrain or moving large scale units through it have met with abject failure.

@@Tundra
In the near-polar regions of any world, there is a borderline terrain known as Tundra. These barren plains have an extremely low average temperature and a very short summer season, but they are not cold enough to remain frozen year-round. The primary characteristic of the tundra is a layer of permanently frozen soil just below the topsoil layer; this permafrost is relatively shallow compared to that on cold planets, but it is deep enough to prevent most plants from taking root, which makes agriculture all but impossible. Like deserts, tundra receives little precipitation. However, the flat, frozen ground keeps groundwater from draining, forming bogs where various grasses, mosses, and other simple vegetation can grow. Despite the harsh environment, a wide variety of animal life flourishes in the tundra, providing possible sources of food and potential for collection of unusual genetic data.

@@Adnausium Ore
Adnausium is a rare mineral on Funestis, and it is not found at all on our far-off home planet. Due to its unusually high content of enriched radioactive substances and useful rare elements, this ore is prized by both miners and industrialists, and any city with a nearby source of this should profit greatly in the materiel department. Our scientists have studied this mineral extensively, and most are convinced that adnausium is not a naturally occurring material. Rather, they speculate that during one of the advanced "empire" stages of Funestian history, the previous  inhabitants of this planet developed techniques for seeding and manipulating the earth to produce the desired mix of elements. Mining projects are proceeding apace, despite the suspicious nature of the ore and its side-effects. Nausea is the most pronounced hazard of prolonged exposure to the unprocessed ore--thus the name.

@@Algae Mats
On every life-bearing world so far discovered, there exists some form of algae. This extremely simple organism is accepted by many as, historically, one of the first living things to be capable of deriving energy from sunlight to produce nutrients. In the slow-convecting oceans of Funestis, clumps of algae gather in giant floating colonies. These tiny, slimy plants create lumpy floating "islands" made up entirely of material that, with some processing, is perfectly edible. These floating slime clumps also tend to inconvenience shipping, and movement through these areas is often slow.

@@Artifacts
When a civilization collapses, it leaves behind traces of itself that future archaeologists can find. From the largest, globe-spanning empire to the smallest peripatetic tribe, remnants of almost every culture lie buried or hidden in the areas where the population once lived. Tools and devices, whether complete, broken, or partial, can provide masses of information about their former users; these finds are grouped under the general terms 'artifacts' and 'relics'. In the Lalande 21185 system, most of the artifacts found are objects (and pieces of objects) left by long-dead native civilizations--alien empires whose technology seems to have been superior to ours. These devices are valuable sources of research, despite the fact that their original function often remains unknown.

@@Bauxite
Aluminum is one of the most useful of modern materials, and bauxite is the ore from which we make it. For reasons as yet undiscovered, the mountains of Funestis contain greater quantities of bauxite than those of our far-off home planet, and these deposits are closer to the surface than geologic theory would lead us to expect. As with so many things on this world, we suspect that the root cause lies far in the past, in some intentional interference in the natural processes.

@@Bunnies
As odd as the dust seas of this world are, the life forms that inhabit them are stranger still. The "bunnies" (named by one of our more fanciful researchers) bear a striking similarity to the tumbleweeds of the North American southwest. These plant-like organisms are, in fact, an agglomeration of Naumachian dust, on which a filamentous, orange fungus grows; the fungal threads serve to hold the dust motes together in a loose organization. Even more surprising to early explorers was the accidentally discovered fact that the bunnies are edible.

@@City in Stasis
The legend of the hidden city of Eidolon is generally accepted as a myth and nothing more. Supposedly, at the fall of the Ha'Gibborim empire, the leaders of the capital city set in motion a plan to preserve it, though without its population. The city of Eidolon was evacuated, sealed in a time-static bubble, and intentionally sunk deep into the clouds of Nona. If the story has any basis in truth (which is unlikely), Eidolon rests in the stasis bubble to this day, all its ultra-high technology intact, waiting to be discovered.

@@Closbeast
Theories of parallel evolution got a boost when our early colonists first discovered herds of closbeasts roaming the prairies of Funestis. These four-legged ruminants bear a startling resemblance to the grass-eating animals of home. The major difference--other than the oddments of internal anatomy--is the single, swept-back "miter" antler horn. This hard crest projects like a fingernail from the back of each individual's head to a length of almost twice that of the head itself. It is a dangerous weapon, but the miter is used only in self defense and during mating contests with other closbeasts.

@@Conduits
If anyone needs further evidence that the builders of the platforms on this world had technology far in advance of any we have yet discovered, these energy delivery systems should be proof enough. The conduit material itself is semi-transparent, yet it is strong enough to contain cosmic forces that boggle the minds of our high-energy physicists. We assume that these conduits shuttle energy to ancient alien centers of some type, but we have not been able to make sense of the pattern to the system--if there is one. Although we do not fully understand the energies involved, that doesn't stop us from putting them to good use, and the materiel boost these regions provide is substantial. Travel over these areas can be tricky, however.

@@Corrosion
The atmosphere of a gas giant planet is rife with reactive chemicals that can, over time, corrode even the toughest materials. Any weak spot in the structure is constantly bombarded, until it becomes a seed point of decay, which gradually enlarges over the decades. Corroded areas are slightly less defensible, but allow a city to prise more data and materiel from the ancient structures.

@@Debris
No program of space exploration and exploitation is without its share of lost and damaged equipment--space junk. The building of the massive platforms in orbit around Funestis was, evidently, no exception. In fact, given the scale of the construction project, it is surprising that there isn't much more debris floating around. Perhaps the orbits of much of it eventually decayed, and the material fell to the surface. Whatever its origin and original purpose, the debris we find in stable orbits today is useful only as a source of raw materials for industry.

@@Delerium (116)
Delerium (116) is an extremely unusual substance, unknown to our science until its discovery on Naumachia. It defies conventional chemical analysis, but x-ray crystallography shows that its crystalline structure is capable of absorbing, storing, and releasing enormous amounts of energy. We have as yet come up with no satisfactory natural mechanism by which this strange crystal could have been formed, and there is a growing suspicion among the experts that it was actually designed and engineered, and that a technologically advanced past empire somehow seeded and maintained whatever geological processes generated all the delerium in this system. The name of the substance stems from its anaesthetic side effects, which are useful in emergencies, but have proven harmful in long-term use. Delerium (116) is an efficient catalyst for all sorts of power generating reactions, but our researchers harbor a strong suspicion that we have only scratched the surface of this substance's utility.

@@Deposits
Since the earliest days of civilization, groups of people have drawn riches from beneath the ground. Coal, metal ores, gems and precious stones, quartz, and many other useful materials have supported the economies of nations throughout history. Without massive quantities of goods mined from under the ground--minerals--primitive forms of industry are nearly impossible. Modern, spacefaring societies quickly discovered that planets without water or a substantial atmosphere are often left nearly untouched by erosion. This has three consequences. First, the majority of deposits are pristine, left just as they formed when the planet cooled, not degraded by chemical interaction with water or air. Second, some more complex substances--like coal--never form, because they require air or water or biological organisms to exist. Third, lodes of ores near the surface are not uncovered by the scouring of wind and water; this makes them harder to find without advanced techniques. Nearly any rocky world is a good source of minerals, but those without native life forms are easier to exploit, for the environmental concerns are simpler.

@@Discharge
One of the ways we know that the orbiting platforms have been in place for a very long time is by studying their state of disrepair. The areas of rust and corrosion are the most obvious signs, but even more disturbing are the points at which conduits and other infrastructural components have been punctured and energetic plasmas are leaking out. In general, these areas allow us some insights into the workings of the platforms, and the plasmas are often useful in an industrial sense. The risks to the populace, however, pretty much preclude agriculture in discharging regions--except in unusual cases.

@@Diffuse Plasma
Not all of the leftover artifacts from the construction of the platforms are solid. Energy discharges during that time and in the years since the orbiting sites were abandoned have created wispy areas of ionized gasses floating in nearby space. These drifting plasma clouds are no danger to anyone, except in the presence of weapons fire. The energy derived from these sparse clouds allows some slight food production and minimal materiel, but the data boost is substantial.

@@Endolithic Algae
Even in the hostile environment of a barren rock world, life somehow manages to secure a hold and thrive. Nowhere is this more evident than in the forbidding spiky mountains of this planet. At least two different species of algae grow in great colonies at the bases and on the steep sides of these peaks. These plant colonies are endolithic, meaning that they actually exist just below the surface of the rock. Both the red and green forms are edible (after processing), and the plants provide other benefits, as well.

@@Enigmatic Device
This ancient machine has proved to be completely incomprehensible to every examiner. Some few of the component parts seem complete, and those provide clues. Unfortunately, it seems that significant regions of the device exist only in spatial geometries ("dimensions", if you prefer) that are inaccessible to us. Speculations abound, but to date, its purpose remains unknown. We can gather data, but little more.

@@Exposed Wiring
The jury is still out on whether the platforms orbiting Funestis suffer most from degradation due to time or from unfinished construction and haphazard repairs. One symptom of the latter problem is the prevalence of whole regions where the infrastructure--the wiring--is exposed to space. This is less of a danger in the oxygen-free vacuum than it would be on the planet's surface, but the risk of injury posed by these power cables slows travel through the affected areas. On the other hand, the access this gives us to the inner workings of the platforms is a good source of both data and scavenged materiel.

@@Fiah
They look like fish. They act like fish. They are edible like fish, and they even smell like fish. However, do not fall into the trap of thinking that fiah are fish. They are totally alien fish-analogs. The differences are only noticeable on the molecular level, but these are not fish. Really. Ground fiah provide compounds useful in industry, but due to the massive schools' interference with our research rafts, the presence of fiah also reduces the amount of data we can cull from a region.

@@Frozen Artifacts
Entombed in ice, artifacts are often better preserved than they would have been had they been left under less hostile conditions. The extremes of cold and dryness serve to protect the objects from deterioration, especially biological decay. Unfortunately, many of these artifacts rapidly deteriorate when returned to a warmer, wetter environment. For that reason, archaeologists working in polar regions must take special precautions to ensure the safety of their finds. An hour's lack of caution can undo centuries of preservation. For a more complete background on artifacts, please refer to the Artifacts Civilopedia entry.

@@Gracklings
Flying black worms the size of your head are not common on our home world, so the explorers who first encountered a grackling colony were understandably shaken. Though only a few outriders are visible on the surface at any one time, rest assured that beneath the ground there are hundreds more. The outriders' regular movement patterns have been the object of intense study, and we now believe that it is a social "dance" of communication similar to that of a swarm of gnats or the honeybee. With the right preparation, gracklings are edible, but they are not a popular dish. Crushed, the worms can be chemically treated to extract industrially useful solvents, and, as with most of the native Funestian species, there is data to be gained from studying these insects.

@@Huisca
The huisca plant is perhaps the most common vegetable on Funestis, and by a stroke of good fortune, it can be made edible with a minimum of processing. They generally grow in small clumps, but it's not uncommon to see a lone huisca establishing a new clump. The leaves are the edible portion of the plant; for cooking purposes, they are nearly as versatile as lettuce or seaweed. The bright red seed-bearing sac is tough and contains an unacceptably high level of toxic heavy metals. Efforts to cultivate a domesticated variety of this prolific plant have met with no success to date, but some of the best horticulturists in the system are at work on the problem, and it's just a matter of time.

@@Ice Worms
Extreme climates tend to produce unusual adaptations, and the Funestian ice worms are no exception. Taxonomists originally mistook these large, warm blooded worms for snakes, because of their great size. They weren't sure what to make of the fur. Ice worms typically appear in nests of hundreds or up to thousands of individuals (not that you can distinguish one from another in the writhing mass). Ice worms are poisonous and inedible, but their digging often exposes small mineral deposits, and additional genetic data is welcome in any city.

@@Interzona
On every planet where life has developed, native organisms have adapted and evolved to survive in their home environment. The salt flats of Funestis boast some of the largest species of insect ever discovered. One of these is the interzona (Diplopoda Funestia), an unusual variety of millipede. Outwardly and in many internal features, these creatures resemble huge black millipedes like those found in the African jungles on Earth. Unlike the Earth species, however, these are social insects; the interzona thrive in huge, labyrinthine underground nests. D. Funestia are nocturnal, but will swarm to protect the nest even at the height of day. Thus, travel near a nest is slow and careful. Interzona are considered a delicacy in many cities, and entomologists are still studying their unusual habits.

@@Keening Tree
In the crystalline forests of this world, one sometimes finds a rare and beautiful oddity--a keening tree. These are not different from the usual crystal tree, except that subtle defects in the crystal structure cause the keener to be highly sensitive to vibration. The entire tree resonates in harmony with the minute expansions and contractions of the planet's crust (as different parts of the planet warm and cool in the sunlight). Even in the sparse atmosphere of this low-gravity planet, the resonating crystal causes pleasant tones that often approximate music. You can find these rare trees easily, as the structural defects also change the color of the crystal. Study of these crystals brings in a good amount of data. What's less obvious is that the trees' music supplies a little food, by drawing tiny native animals close to the surface. The crystals are also useful in some industrial capacities.

@@Leakage
One of the ways we know that the orbiting platforms have been in place for a very long time is by studying their state of disrepair. The areas of rust and corrosion are the most obvious signs, but even more disturbing are the points at which conduits and other infrastructural components have been punctured and energetic plasmas are leaking out. In general, these areas allow us some insights into the workings of the platforms, and the plasmas are often useful in an industrial sense. The risks to the populace, however, pretty much preclude agriculture in discharging regions--except in unusual cases.

@@Lode
Since the earliest days of civilization, groups of people have drawn riches from beneath the ground. Coal, metal ores, gems and precious stones, quartz, and many other useful materials have supported the economies of nations throughout history. Without massive quantities of goods mined from under the ground--minerals--primitive forms of industry are nearly impossible. Modern, spacefaring societies quickly discovered that planets without water or a substantial atmosphere are often left nearly untouched by erosion. This has three consequences. First, the majority of deposits are pristine, left just as they formed when the planet cooled, not degraded by chemical interaction with water or air. Second, some more complex substances--like coal--never form, because they require air or water or biological organisms to exist. Third, lodes of ores near the surface are not uncovered by the scouring of wind and water; this makes them harder to find without advanced techniques. Nearly any rocky world is a good source of minerals, but those without native life forms are easier to exploit, for the environmental concerns are simpler.

@@Minerals
Since the earliest days of civilization, groups of people have drawn riches from beneath the ground. Coal, metal ores, gems and precious stones, quartz, and many other useful materials have supported the economies of nations throughout history. Without massive quantities of goods mined from under the ground--minerals--primitive forms of industry are nearly impossible. Modern, spacefaring societies quickly discovered that planets without water or a substantial atmosphere are often left nearly untouched by erosion. This has three consequences. First, the majority of deposits are pristine, left just as they formed when the planet cooled, not degraded by chemical interaction with water or air. Second, some more complex substances--like coal--never form, because they require air or water or biological organisms to exist. Third, lodes of ores near the surface are not uncovered by the scouring of wind and water; this makes them harder to find without advanced techniques. Nearly any rocky world is a good source of minerals, but those without native life forms are easier to exploit, for the environmental concerns are simpler.

@@Mites
The rare species that eke out a living in the dust seas of Naumachia are invariably unusual. One of the few that is actually dangerous is the mite (Callinectes Pyroglyphida). These crab-like animals do not form social groups, but their biology is such that they never stop growing, shedding shells much as many terrestrial species of crabs do. This species has no known predators, and population control is limited to starvation, parasites, disease, and occasional cannibalism. Thus, older individuals can grow to enormous size. There is some minor danger to shipping for any city established near a concentration of mites, but this is more than compensated by the usefulness of these edible creatures.

@@Monopoles
In nature, every magnet, every object, and every particle that has a magnetic field is a dipole. That is, the magnetic field generated by a thing has two opposite poles, commonly referred to as "north" and "south", or "+" and "-", or "positive" and "negative" poles. According to some quantum field theories, however, it is possible for a one-sided magnetic charge to exist. The subatomic particle associated with this partner-less magnetic field would be half of a dipole--a magnetic monopole. If these particles actually exist, each one would be massive.; the smallest weight predicted by gauge theory is on the order of a thousand times the mass of a proton. In fact, without some hitherto unknown technology to prevent it, a sphere of monopoles more than a meter in diameter would collapse to form a black hole. Based on our estimates of the total mass-energy in the universe and the amount of mass already accounted for by observation, it is guaranteed that monopoles, if they in fact exist, must be extremely rare.

@@Mysterious Thing
Not only do we not know what this antique instrument does, we can't even figure out what it is made of or from where it derives its motive power. As is true of many of the ancient devices we have stumbled across on this planet, significant parts of the thing exist only in spatial geometries completely inaccessible to us. Speculative theories are a dime a dozen, but the real use of these things remains unknown. We gather data, but that's all.

@@Ores
Since the earliest days of civilization, groups of people have drawn riches from beneath the ground. Coal, metal ores, gems and precious stones, quartz, and many other useful materials have supported the economies of nations throughout history. Without massive quantities of goods mined from under the ground--minerals--primitive forms of industry are nearly impossible. Modern, spacefaring societies quickly discovered that planets without water or a substantial atmosphere are often left nearly untouched by erosion. This has three consequences. First, the majority of deposits are pristine, left just as they formed when the planet cooled, not degraded by chemical interaction with water or air. Second, some more complex substances--like coal--never form, because they require air or water or biological organisms to exist. Third, lodes of ores near the surface are not uncovered by the scouring of wind and water; this makes them harder to find without advanced techniques. Nearly any rocky world is a good source of minerals, but those without native life forms are easier to exploit, for the environmental concerns are simpler.

@@Pachyloumis
Plants referred to as "ground cover" stay low to the ground and spread out in wide patches. They provide both hiding places for smaller animals and some protection against erosion of the topsoil. The sub-arctic Pachyloumis vine also has edible roots. Though this Funestian native resembles ground ivy in many particulars, it is in fact subtly different--but not in any substantial way that would interest anyone but a molecular botanist.

@@Pictoglyphs
Though many technologically advanced cultures use alphabets in which the symbols (letters) represent sounds, that is not the only way to form a language. For example, each symbol in the Egyptian hieroglyphic "alphabet" represents a word or an idea. The characters of modern Chinese evolved from ancient forms, and a single symbol can represent a complex thought. Thus, it is not surprising that many alien civilizations use pictoglyph languages. Even when the authors are of the same species, pictoglyphs are nearly impossible for an outsider to translate. This difficulty is multiplied when the creators of the language are completely alien and long dead, as in this case. Still, we try, and the resulting data adds to a city's treasury of information.

@@Picus
The forbidding Willies are home to perhaps the most trusting of the Funestian animal species--the picus lizard. These agile, curious, cat-sized creatures have no fear of any species, and will approach anyone without hesitation. In fact, they are sometimes kept as pets--a picus thrives on attention and does not seem to miss its litter-mates, though it will not breed outside of its home nesting ground. Developmental ecologists hypothesize that, because they were always protected by the plant life in the areas where they chose to nest, these creatures never had the need for a defensive flight response. Properly prepared, picus meat has a delicate, complex flavor, and any city near a nesting area can profit from the occasional controlled hunt. Data collection, however, is hampered in these regions by the constant interruption by hordes of attention-seeking lizards.

@@Quench Fruit
If you are familiar with the life cycle of the Funestian burning tree (Pyroquercus Funestia), then you will understand that these forests could not have developed without evolving something like quench fruit. The sparkbags that serve to start the fires that activate and spread the trees' seeds are not foolproof systems. Though they are meant to ignite in the dry summer, when the seed pods are ready and all the quench fruit have fallen off the tree, environmental stresses can sometimes "fool" the bags into detonating at inopportune times. If a tree somehow catches fire at the wrong time of year (even due to other natural processes, like lightning), any quench fruit near the flame erupts, spewing out an odd chemical that quickly snuffs the fire. What is so odd about this chemical is that, beyond being an efficient fire retardant, it is also quite delicious.

@@Rare Earths
The oxides of elements 57 through 71 (Antimony to Lutetium) are considered the "rare earths" and are found in many common minerals. The rare earth elements are closely related (in terms of chemical properties), and all of them are considered "metallic" in that they share electrons more easily than non-metallic elements. The rare earth ores are relatively easy to mine, and range in color from orange-red to yellowish-white. The elements derived from them are extraordinarily useful in high-tech applications.

@@Razor Beast
It takes a tough hide to survive in the acid shallows of Funestis, and the razor beast (Sus Xyricthys) has one. This animal has been compared, both in appearance and taste, to the European wild boar and the razorback found in southern North America. The abundance of tiny, razor sharp, quill-like bristles found all over its hide make it somewhat more dangerous than either, however. Debristled razor beast hide can be cured and tanned, and the result is a tough, waterproof, workable leather-like material.

@@Relics
When a civilization collapses, it leaves behind traces of itself that future archaeologists can find. From the largest, globe-spanning empire to the smallest peripatetic tribe, remnants of almost every culture lie buried or hidden in the areas where the population once lived. Tools and devices, whether complete, broken, or partial, can provide masses of information about their former users; these finds are grouped under the general terms 'artifacts' and 'relics'. In the Lalande 21185 system, most of the artifacts found are objects (and pieces of objects) left by long-dead native civilizations--alien empires whose technology seems to have been superior to ours. These devices are valuable sources of research, despite the fact that their original function often remains unknown.

@@Ruins
We find ruins on Funestis much less frequently than one would suspect, especially considering the abundance of artifacts left by long-dead civilizations. The most convincing theory our archaeologists have put forward is that these ruins are not remnants of the same "empire" that built the majority of the artifacts and relics we have found. They propose that the older civilization was much more advanced, and that these ruined buildings survive from a later, less powerful culture. Whatever the truth, ruins provide some data and extra materiel for a city that exploits them.

@@Salvage
You no doubt know that our landing on this planet was a difficult event. During the final approach, our ship was disintegrating, and pieces of it fell off to litter the local space. The larger pieces fell to ground on Funestis, ending up as wreckage on the surface, but many of the smaller fragments went into orbit. As we regain our space-going abilities, we have found quite a lot of the original debris--small equipment and bits of scrap metal--on the ancient platforms. Most of this can be salvaged and put to some use. If you find salvage, draw what materiel you can from it. Despite some claims to the contrary, it is no one's property.

@@Scrap
You no doubt know that our landing on this planet was a difficult event. During the final approach, our ship was disintegrating, and pieces of it fell off to litter the local space. The larger pieces fell to ground on Funestis, ending up as wreckage on the surface, but many of the smaller fragments went into orbit. As we regain our space-going abilities, we have found quite a lot of the original debris--small equipment and bits of scrap metal--on the ancient platforms. Most of this can be salvaged and put to some use. If you find salvagable materials, draw what you can from it. Despite some claims to the contrary, it is no one's property.

@@Sparkbags
If you understand the life cycle of the Funestian burning tree (Pyroquercus Funestia), then the existence of sparkbags will come as no surprise to you. During the spring season, each tree grows a multitude of hard seed pods. In summer, a large fruit--the sparkbag--grows on certain trees. At the end of summer, when all the trees are driest, the sparkbag detonates, starting a forest fire that activates and spreads the seeds. Botanists are still not sure how a grove chooses which tree will bear fruit, but in some areas that process seems to get out of hand, and a harvestable accumulation results. Sparkbags are no good as food, but they can be put to all sorts of industrial uses.

@@Stable Cyclone
The long-lasting convection "storms" on a gas giant planet are typically huge. Jupiter's Great Red Spot, for example, is large enough that you could fit the entire Earth inside it. Thus, it is not surprising to find smaller weather patterns inside these giant meteorological phenomena. Just as some of the storms themselves last for decades, the violent cyclones--technically, they're denser convection cells--that often form inside those storms frequently survive nearly as long as the entire overall convection pattern. Storm areas provide very little that is of use, and in the dangerous cyclonic regions, even that is not available. These cyclones are utterly useless to cities and difficult to travel over.

@@Supply Box
As you are already aware, our arrival on this planet did not go exactly as planned. In the process of plummeting through the system almost completely out of control, our starship left pieces of itself strewn throughout local space. Naturally, most of these fragments followed roughly the same course as the main ship; we were not able to make many course corrections in those final hours. The larger pieces fell to ground on Funestis, ending up as wreckage on the surface. Many smaller fragments went into orbit. By sheer blind luck, a number of supply containers survived intact, and we have found them scattered about on the orbiting platforms. These are welcome sources of both food and materiel; do not squander them.

@@Supply Crate
As you are already aware, our arrival on this planet did not go exactly as planned. In the process of plummeting through the system almost completely out of control, our starship left pieces of itself strewn throughout local space. Naturally, most of these fragments followed roughly the same course as the main ship; we were not able to make many course corrections in those final hours. The larger pieces fell to ground on Funestis, ending up as wreckage on the surface. Many smaller fragments went into orbit. By sheer blind luck, a number of supply containers survived intact, and we have found them scattered about on the orbiting platforms. These are welcome sources of both food and materiel; do not squander them.

@@Supply Pack
As you are already aware, our arrival on this planet did not go exactly as planned. In the process of plummeting through the system almost completely out of control, our starship left pieces of itself strewn throughout local space. Naturally, most of these fragments followed roughly the same course as the main ship; we were not able to make many course corrections in those final hours. The larger pieces fell to ground on Funestis, ending up as wreckage on the surface. Many smaller fragments went into orbit. By sheer blind luck, a number of supply containers survived intact, and we have found them scattered about on the orbiting platforms. These are welcome sources of both food and materiel; do not squander them.

@@Supply Pod
As you are already aware, our arrival on this planet did not go exactly as planned. In the process of plummeting through the system almost completely out of control, our starship left pieces of itself strewn throughout local space. Naturally, most of these fragments followed roughly the same course as the main ship; we were not able to make many course corrections in those final hours. The larger pieces fell to ground on Funestis, ending up as wreckage on the surface. Many smaller fragments went into orbit. By sheer blind luck, a number of supply containers survived intact, and we have found them scattered about on the orbiting platforms. These are welcome sources of both food and materiel; do not squander them.

@@Thalarctos
Thalarctos are big, dangerous, and not as dumb as they look. It takes keen predatory instincts to survive as a carnivore in the empty tundra, and this bear-like mammal has what it takes. More than a few foolhardy adventurers have been felled by the backhand swipe of a huge, clawed foot, then gored by the saber-tooth canine fangs hidden under the thalarctos' jowl flaps. These animals are hunted both for food and for their tough hides--as useful as leather and longer lasting.

@@Time Bubble
The legend of the hidden city of Eidolon is generally accepted as a myth and nothing more. Supposedly, at the fall of the Ha'Gibborim empire, the leaders of the capital city set in motion a plan to preserve it, though without its population. The city of Eidolon was evacuated, sealed in a time-static bubble, and intentionally sunk deep into the clouds of Nona. If the story has any basis in truth (which is unlikely), Eidolon rests in the stasis bubble to this day, all its ultra-high technology intact, waiting to be discovered.

@@Unearthed Artifacts
Soil is not the same everywhere. An object buried in one area will quickly deteriorate as microbes and other biological forces attack it and use its component substances for food. The same artifact, buried a few hundred yards away, will find itself desiccated--dried up, mummified, and preserved for centuries. In yet a third location, a thing could be soaked in mineral-rich waters, and its every molecule could slowly, over thousands of years, be replaced by stone--petrified. Careful digging is one of the most powerful tools in the archaeologist's arsenal. When an artifact is uncovered, it is recorded in place, then gently removed for study. Professional researchers take every precaution to preserve the object intact; carelessness can be catastrophic, and much valuable information is lost when untrained amateurs attempt to unearth artifacts. For a more complete background on artifacts, please refer to the Artifacts Civilopedia entry.

@@Vertida
Grain plants were among the first to be domesticated, and they have always been among the staple crops of any long-lived civilization. The Vertida is one of the few grains native to Funestis that is safe for our colonial populace to eat. Easy to grow and harvest, this plant is a rare friend in an otherwise hostile environment.

@@Vetch
Wherever there are successful life forms, you inevitably find parasites that feed on those organisms. Some are simply dependent, like fleas, and others, such as the wood-digesting microorganisms in a termite's gut, are actually symbiotic--they give the host something in return. Vetch falls into the second category. This vine-like plant species comes in many varieties, but all live only on the surface of the L. Leviathana gasbags. In exchange for the nutrients they steal from the larger plants, the leaves of the vetch secrete powerful biotoxins that paralyze many insect parasites that prey on the gasbags. After the hull has been removed, the vetch bean can be cooked and is safe to eat.

@@Water Generator
After all the time that has elapsed, it is amazing that any of the ancient alien artifacts and devices function at all. One of the most surprising and useful discoveries yet made in orbit is the existence of the ancient water generation systems--and that fact that they still work. Our engineers and researchers have yet to figure out how these self-contained units generate water seemingly without input of any kind; the only resources available to them are the minimal power they draw from the general grid and the exceedingly rare molecules that populate orbital space. Despite not knowing how they work, our cities are more than happy to put these devices to regular use, primarily as an aid to agriculture, but also (in some cases) to industry as well.

@@Water Ice
On any planet, water is one of the most valuable resources of all. We can lose sight of this when we live in an area where it is plentiful, but the fact remains--without water, life as we know it is impossible. Deposits of frozen water on a dry world are more precious than platinum. Water ice is relatively free of contaminants, and requires less processing than most sources of water to be useable. Both agriculture and industry become much more productive when a supply is nearby.

@@Water Vapor
No matter how advanced and how expert at biological science we become, one thing remains true--without water, life as we know it is impossible. Thus, on any planet, water is one of the most valuable resources of all. On gas giant planets, the most plentiful supply takes the form of clouds of water vapor. At a depth where the temperature and pressure are in the right range, water can exist in liquid form. On Nona, these life-sustaining clouds are found approximately 100 to 150 kilometers beneath the "surface" of the atmosphere. They range from 25 km above to 25 km below the ancient floating platforms. Even on such a hostile world, both agriculture and industry become more productive when a supply of water is nearby.

@@Yellow Willies
The semi-sentient yellow form of the bizarre plants known as "Willies" was the most unusual and controversial species discovered on Funestis--until the discovery of the violent Blue Willies. (Please read the Civilopedia entry on The Willies for more details.) When a crop of the normal version of these plants is threatened by environmental pressures, one individual out of the group undergoes a transformation, a hormonal cascade that we still do not have a firm grasp on. The plant becomes a flowering animal (at least on the cellular level), and is then partially mobile, slightly less intelligent than the average dog, and toxic. With it's powerful paralyzing venom, a Yellow Willie is capable of defending the stand from even the largest Funestian beasts. Regions infested with Yellow Willies are useless for food crops, but great places to do horticultural research. The stalks of dead Willies can also be used for building furniture, but the cost of harvesting them is high.


@GOVERNMENT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@GOVERNMENT_INDEX
0,			; Pandemonium
1,			; Despotism
5,			; Hierarchy
2,			; Collective
4,			; The Great Joining
6,			; Confederation
3,			; Proteocracy
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Pandemonium
Pandemonium is not so much a type of government as the lack of any stable government. Pandemonium occurs when your civilization's government falls or when you decide to have a Revolution. After a few turns of Pandemonium, you will be able to reconstitute your government. Pandemonium is similar to Despotism, except that the inaccuracy rate is very high (see Despotism). No taxes are collected during a Pandemonium, and no scientific research is conducted.

@@Despotism
In a Despotism, the ruler has absolute control over his or her subjects, and this control is usually enforced by the military. This system has a tendency to minimize individual freedom, and reduce the efficiency of production efforts.

* Each unit above the city size costs one materiel per turn.
* Settler units require one Food per turn.

Up to three military units stationed in each city help maintain order, making one unhappy citizen (per unit) content.

Despotism has a high rate of inaccuracy and waste.  The level of inaccuracy in a particular city is based on its distance from your capital.

* Under a Despotism, none of the tax rates (science, taxes, and entertainment) may be set higher than 60%.
* Any terrain square that ordinarily produces three or more of any resource (Food, Materiel, or Data) produces one less.
* Because of Despotism's high rate of inaccuracy, it is almost always an inferior form of government. Try to switch to something else as soon as possible.

@@Collective
A Collective government is ruled by a Central Committee, which in turn is overseen by the Doyen. The actions of these rulers, however, simply reflect the will of the population, as collected through tamper-proof crystal thermionic communications techniques. While the technology is reliable, the actions of those in power, once elected, are not. The automation of the infrastructure underlying much of the economy and the military make abuses of power all too easy to commit in secrecy, and often without repercussions.

* Each unit beyond the fourth unit costs one materiel per turn.
* Settler units require two Food per turn.

Up to three military units stationed in each city help maintain order, making TWO unhappy citizens (per unit) content.

In the Collective, peer review and the free flow of information virtually eliminates fraud and mistakes in data recording. Your cities, therefore, experience relatively low rates of inaccuracy.

* All Salmagundy units produced under Collective governments are Veterans.
* In the Collective, none of the tax rates (science, taxes, and entertainment) may be set higher than 80%.

* The Collective is best for large, far-flung empires that need to maintain a large military.
* Use your powerful spies to steal technology.

@@Proteocracy
A Proteocracy is ruled by a Chimeron--the most flexible adult citizen willing to serve. Several of the least flexible citizens are conscripted into the Senate, to offer a counterpoint to the Chimeron's policies. Proteocracy is an extremely plastic and responsive form of government, which results in great efficiency from its cities and citizens, but also higher expectations for personal freedom and happiness.

* Each unit costs one materiel per turn.
* Settler units require two Food per turn.

Each unit which is not in a friendly city or a force field within 3 spaces of a friendly city causes two citizens in its home city to become unhappy.

Proteocracies experience no inaccuracy or waste.

* There are no limits on the tax rate settings (science, taxes, and entertainment).
* Under a Proteocracy, each terrain square that ordinarily produces at least one unit of data produces an extra unit.
* The units and cities of a Proteocracy are immune to bribery.
* Your Senate may force a peaceful solution in a conflict.

* Proteocracies can produce spectacular amounts of revenue and scientific research.  However, because of the severe happiness restrictions on military units, this form of government tends to be viable only for large, advanced civilizations.
* Increasing your luxuries rate and building Wonders can help alleviate this problem.

@@The Great Joining
The Great Joining is not exactly a form of government; it is a mass-mind coordinated by a central male Locus or ancestral queen (the Progenitor). All "citizens" of the Joining share each other's thoughts, beliefs, and intentions at all times. This results in a rigidly structured, highly efficient society, economy, and military. Unfortunately, a single mind is severely limited in its ability to evolve new and creative ideas, and science flounders under this regime.

* Each unit beyond the fifth unit costs one materiel per turn.
* Only the Unimind can cultivate and control the Blue Willies, which never require maintenance.
* Settler units require one Food per turn.

All citizens are submerged in the bliss of the Great Joining; there are no individuals, so no individual is ever unhappy.
The Joining has a very low rate of inaccuracy.

* None of the tax rates (science, taxes, and entertainment) may be set higher than 80%.
* All Science production is HALVED.
* Improvements which normally convert unhappy citizens to content citizens instead produce genetic mapping data (Base Pairs) equal to the number of citizens they would otherwise affect. These improvements also require no maintenance.
* The diplomatic penalties for "terrorist acts" committed by your spying and diplomatic units are reduced.

* The Great Joining eliminates all happiness problems and provides excellent data revenue. Scientific research tends to languish.

@@Hierarchy
A Hierarchy is a rigidly structured government ruled by a single person. This ruler has less absolute power than a despot, as he or she must gain and maintain the loyalty of the upper echelons. Political maneuvering and intrigue is unavoidable under this system, and there is always bureaucratic inefficiency to balance out the productivity gained through greater organization of the industrial base.

* Each unit beyond the third unit costs one materiel per turn.
* Settler units require one Food per turn.

Up to three military units stationed in each city help maintain order, making one unhappy citizen (per unit) content.

Hierarchy has a moderate rate of inaccuracy and waste.  The level of inaccuracy in a particular city is based on its distance from your capital.

* Under a Hierarchy, none of the tax rates (science, taxes, and entertainment) may be set higher than 70%.

* Hierarchy is an excellent form of government for a young civilization.

@@Confederation
A Confederation is a treaty-bound assembly of independent states that have placed themselves under the rule of a central governing body. This centralized government exercise control over all matters that affect the nation as a whole, while the individual states have quite a bit of freedom in governing their local affairs. Day to day decisions are made by the Executive, but declarations of war are subject to review by a Senate.

* Each unit costs one materiel per turn.
* Settler units require two Food per turn.

Each military unit after the first which is not in a friendly city or a force field within 3 spaces of a friendly city causes one citizen in its home city to become unhappy.

A Confederation has a low rate of inaccuracy and waste. The level of inaccuracy in a particular city is based on its distance from your capital.

* None of the tax rates (science, taxes, and entertainment) may be set above 80%.
* Under a Confederation, each terrain square that ordinarily produces at least one unit of data produces an extra unit.
* Your senate may force a peaceful solution in a conflict.

* Switching to a Confederation can give an astounding boost to your science and tax revenues, although you'll probably have to divert some of your data to entertainment.
* It becomes more difficult and expensive to keep an army in the field, but building the Organ Bank wonder can help with this problem.

@CONCEPT_DESCRIPTIONS

@@Biochaos
Biochaos is most commonly caused by the excessive production of materiel in and around a city; however, it might also be caused by large city populations (after the emergence of the shape-shifting Proteus Sapiens), disintegrator attacks, or the meltdown of a Biochaotic Generator. When a city poses a potential biochaos problem, warning signs of the Chaos Potential appear in the City Display. The more "Chaos %" a city generates, the higher the city's chance, each turn, of unleashing biological chaos in a terrain square within the city radius. When the amount of biochaos loose in the world reaches sufficiently critical levels, there is a chance that a spontaneous global environmental restructuring--the Gaia Reaction--can occur.

Biochaos can be cleaned up by moving settler-type units into the chaotic square and pressing the "P" key, or choosing the "Clean Up Biochaos" command from the Orders menu. The Chaos Potential of a city can be reduced through the construction of certain City Improvements or by reducing the city's production of materiel.

@@City Squares
The resources used by a city are not only generated in the squares surrounding the city: they are also generated by the city square itself. The city square generates all the resources normally produced by the Terrain type on which the city is built. In addition, the Terrain square occupied by the city is improved to the maximum extent possible. The city square automatically contains a road, which is upgraded to a slideway when the requisite advance is discovered. The city square is also automatically cultivated or refined, depending on the type of terrain. Finally, if the city is built on terrain that normally produces no Materiel, one Materiel is automatically added to the other resources generated in the city square. These enhancements ensure that the city square produces the maximum amount of resources possible.

@@Combat Damage
It is possible for units to be damaged (and survive) as a result of combat. In each successful attack, a unit inflicts an amount of damage equal to its Firepower rating. The amount of damage a unit can sustain before it is destroyed is determined by multiplying the unit's Hit Point rating by ten.

The approximate amount of damage a unit has sustained can be determined by the length and color of the unit's damage bar (the colored bar near the unit). A green bar indicates that the unit has lost from 0 to 33 percent of its Hit Points, a yellow bar shows that the unit has lost from 34 to 66 percent, and a red bar indicates that it has lost 67 percent or more.

Damage also affects the movement of a unit. The percentage of movement lost is equivalent to the percentage of Hit Points lost. Naval units can never have their movement reduced below two. The movement of air units is not affected by damage.

@@Cultivation
When the early settlers moved out of their wrecked escape pods into the unfamiliar terrain of Funestis, they had to reinvent the technology of cultivation. Some of the native plants were edible, and some were not. Some of the food crops brought from home in seed form thrived in the new soil, but many types withered and died. Trial and error was their only teacher, and those who survived and prospered were those who learned to work with the land.

Cultivation increases Food production in most types of terrain. Only squares vertically or horizontally adjacent to an ocean, a river, or another cultivated square can be cultivated. After the discovery of Prionic Stabilizers, terrain squares can be double-cultivated to create tohubohu. Order any settler-type unit to cultivate by pressing the "I" key or selecting "Build Cultivation" from the Orders menu.

@@Data
"Data" represents more than just information; it's the medium of exchange between cities and civilizations. Data includes the exchange of knowledge and ideas, and it can be funneled into recreational activities for the citizens of your civilization. The total amount of Data produced by each city is represented in the City Display. Data is then broken down into three separate components: Tax income (Bp), Entertainment, and Science. The amount of Data allocated to each of these areas is controlled by selecting the "Change Tax Rate" option on the Kingdom menu.

Data can be increased through the construction of certain City Improvements and Wonders of the World. It can also be increased through terrain improvements, and through the establishment of trade routes.

@@Currents
On Nona, there are (of course) no rivers as we know them. Liquid water might exist at some depth where the pressure and temperature are perfectly balanced, but on the surface, it is far too cold. There are, however, certain stable currents of hydrogen gas that move over the solid terrain. These wispy streams are mostly hydrogen, but they also contain helium and a number of other useful gasses. Using the ambient hydrocarbons (methane and so on) for extra fuel allows nearly any unit to move more quickly when traveling along one of these streams.

@@Disband
When a friendly unit becomes obsolete, costs too much to maintain, or causes unhappiness among your population, you might want to eliminate the unit. To do so, order it to disband by holding down the shift key and pressing "D", or by selecting "Disband" from the Orders menu. Once disbanded, the unit is permanently removed from the game.

When a unit is disbanded inside a friendly city, half of the unit's production cost is added to the production of whatever unit, improvement, or Wonder is currently under production in the city.

Note that some units, particularly the more powerful genetically engineered individuals, resist being forced to disband.

@@Dust Runs
In a convergence of structural evolution that is as oddly beautiful as it is strange, the suspended dust that fills the "seas" of Naumachia is replenished by downhill flows that resemble rivers. Early survey teams found that these Dust Runs conceal smooth, easily traversed ground; geologists suspect that the action of friction over hundreds of years has ground down the rough edges of the rock beneath the dust. This grinding has also revealed some of the underlying strata, giving our researchers easy access to extra geo-historical data.

@@Entertainment
The provision of Entertainment for your citizens costs data, but is often well worth it. Each two units of Entertainment make one content citizen happy or one unhappy citizen content. The amount of Entertainment a city produces is mainly determined by the percentage of Data you have allocated to Entertainment. You can adjust this using the "Change Tax Rate" command on the Kingdom menu. A city's Entertainment can also be increased by building certain City Improvements and Wonders of the World, and by converting citizens into Entertainers.

@@Force Field
Once your civilization has discovered E-M Repulsion Fields, settler-type units (Colonists, Environeers, the Nidus, and the Melior) have the ability to construct standing force fields. These can be used by any unit that comes along to defend city perimeters and to block key points of access. A properly manned force field can provide an effective defense by doubling the defensive strength of all units stationed within. Unlike in normal combat, units stacked within a force field defend are destroyed one at a time in battle, rather than all being destroyed simultaneously. Force fields themselves do not suffer damage in the attack.

To have a unit construct a force field, press the "F" key or choose the Build Force Field command from the Orders menu. Units within a force field have their defensive strengths doubled. Under a Confederation, units stationed inside fortresses built within three squares of their home city do not cause unhappiness.

@@Fortify
Roman legions on campaign halted their march early enough each evening to build a completely fortified camp for the night. They had learned the value of defensive fortifications when under attack. Where possible, it is the standard practice of most armies to build defensive works of some type whenever expecting an attack. Fortified defenders have their fighting strength multiplied, making it much harder to defeat them.

Ground units can be ordered to fortify by pressing the "F" key, or by selecting "Fortify" from the Orders menu. The defensive value of fortified units is increased by 50 percent.

@@Funestis
Funestis (from the Latin "Funestus", meaning "boding evil or death") is about as Earth-like as a planet could be expected to be, considering that it orbits close to a dim, cold, red dwarf star. It was only by the sheerest luck that the survivors of the interstellar colony ship managed to crash land here--the only easily habitable planet in the system. Funestis is a nice enough world for a home base, but the amount of impassable terrain makes travel and long-term colonization a bit difficult. The great majority of useful resources seem to be elsewhere in the system.

@@Gravitic Grid
The greatest challenge of travel between the planets has always been the time factor; interplanetary flight, when not handled efficiently, simply takes too long. This has been especially troublesome since the faraway gas giant Nona became an attractive destination--the distances involved are a factor of ten higher than the simple runs between Funestis and Naumachia. The Gravitic Grid is the answer. This ultramodern facility relies on localized gravity control (Quantum Gravitics) to propel units at remarkable speeds between all three of the explored worlds in this system (and the complex of orbiting platforms around Funestis). Of course, units are still restricted to those places with environments in which they can survive.

@@Hints
Note: This entry is for those players who have gotten stuck or been frustrated by some element of the game that they don't understand. It is not a list of cheats.

1) Any civilization that gets the EarthGate technology wins the game; this is the new "pure research" method of winning.

2) You cannot leave Funestis and get to the other planets until you discover the requisite technology and build units capable of making the trip. Each new frontier is opened by a different advance, and the first civilization to reach a new world gets a reward.

3) You cannot talk with aliens until you (or they) have researched Xenolinguistics.

4) If you destroy all of the alien civilizations (or all the humans if you play as the aliens), you cut yourself off from the advanced portion of the research tree. (Getting there requires trading advances with them.) This makes it impossible to reach Nona or accomplish the research win (EarthGate). Once you have Quantum Gravitics, you can kill them off if you choose without incurring this penalty.

5) To gain access to the top end of the research tree, you must defeat the HaGibborim guardians in combat (or aquire advances from someone who has).

@@Impassable Terrain
Before the discovery of primitive boats, any deep enough body of water was an insurmountable barrier to travel. Mountain chains, canyons, and other natural obstacles were all at one time considered impassable--until someone figured out a way to get through. Over the course of time, you might encounter terrain that your units cannot enter; this is "impassable" terrain. Air units can travel over impassable terrain without trouble, but most naval and ground units cannot enter these areas at all. The only exceptions are those units with the specific ability to cross impassable terrain.

@@Inaccuracy and Waste
As your civilization grows, you might notice that some of your cities are losing some of their Data and Materiel to inaccuracy and waste. Inaccuracy is Data "income" that is lost to error, miscategorization, and other careless practices. Waste is Materiel production that is lost to inefficiency. The farther a city is from your capital, the more inaccuracy and waste it experiences. The amounts of inaccuracy and waste are also affected by the system of government you are using.
 
Inaccuracy and waste, if left unchecked, can significantly slow the development of your civilization. Both can be reduced by 50 percent by building a Satellite Uplink in the city experiencing the problem. The best solution, however, is to switch your system of government to a more advanced form. The more advanced the government, the less inaccuracy and waste you experience. The Collective and Proteocracy alleviate this problem altogether.

@@Invisible Until Combat
In nature, many organisms have evolved methods of concealing themselves. This natural camouflage serves both to hide prey from potential predators and to conceal predators from potential prey. Military units throughout history have taken a lesson from nature and used camouflage of various forms to conceal themselves until they choose to engage in battle. In your efforts to build your civilization, you're quite likely to encounter units, both natural and artificial, that have the ability to remain unseen until they engage in combat. For convenience, all of these units are referred to as "Invisible Until Combat".

@@Lalande 21185
Lalande 21185 is the fifth closest star to Sol (the sun); it's slightly more than 8 light-years distant. This near neighbor is a main sequence red dwarf star of spectral class M2. To an observer in the northern hemisphere, it is visible in Ursa Major (near the Big Dipper) nearly every night. Red dwarf stars are stable and predictable; they're just like our sun, only much smaller and cooler. Lalande 21185 is approaching the Earth at 52 miles per second. Its closest approach will occur in approximately 22,000 A.D.

Lalande 21185 is also one of the many stars that 20th century astronomers have found planets orbiting. The mass of the Lalande system is greater than the mass that can be attributed to the star itself. Calculations by astronomers showed that the "unseen companion" has a mass of 1/100 that of the visible star. On July 11, 1996, George Gatewood announced that he and his team had discovered two classical jovian planets orbiting Lalande 21185. One of the two is slightly smaller than Jupiter and takes 6 Earth years to circle the star at a distance of more than two and a half times the distance between Earth and the sun (2.5 AU). The other is almost twice that size and takes about 30 years to orbit; it never gets closer than 10 AU from the star.

Subtracting the masses of these known planets from the excess mass in the system leaves approximately 204 times the mass of the Earth unaccounted for. Even considering the margin for error and the amount of mass represented by the star's Oort cloud, asteroids, dust, planetary rings, and satellites of planets, this seems like more than enough for there to be a chance of Earth-sized planets in the system. The actual probability depends on which theory of planetary formation you choose, but it's a pretty good bet that there's something there.

@@Materiel
The production of raw materials by your cities is represented in the original game by shield icons. Thus, Materiel is sometimes referred to as "shields". The amount of Materiel produced by each city is displayed in the City Display. Materiel is used to support units. Each unit might, depending on government type and other circumstances, require that its home city expend one Materiel per turn to support the unit. Excess Materiel not used to support units is used for the production of City Improvements, Wonders of the World, and new units.

Materiel production largely depends on the type of terrain surrounding the city. In most circumstances, Materiel production can be increased through the construction of certain Improvements and Wonders. The construction of refineries also improves production in certain types of terrain.

@@Native Transport
Certain units have the ability to move between worlds on their own power. This attribute is referred to as a "Native Transport" ability. Any unit with this sort of power can jaunt from one world to another--within the limits of what worlds it can reach and exist on--without expending any movement points at all. There is a constraint, however. A unit may transport between worlds only at locations where the terrain in the corresponding location on the destination map is of the same domain--land or sea. That is, a naval unit may not transport onto land, and a ground unit may not transport into a sea. Note that this ability is based strictly on the domain of the terrain.

@@Naumachia
Naumachia (from the Latin for "false sea") is a common world in many ways. It's composed of rock, worn down somewhat by the ages. It has little or no atmosphere and not much in the way of gravity. It's an unusual place, however, in that it is the only known planet to have "oceans" of microscopic dust in Brownian suspension. As is true of many rocky planets, Naumachia is a great place for mining and industry, but it's not scenic and wouldn't be such a nice place to live.

@@Nona
Nona is the smaller and closer of the two giant planets that George Gatewood's team found. Like most gas giant worlds, it's a small, rocky core surrounded by enormous amounts of hydrogen and traces of other gasses. Of course, at this scale, "traces" means amounts larger than the entire Earth. There is evidence that the ancient alien species that built the orbital platforms also built platforms floating at a stable depth in the atmosphere of Nona. If this is true, these platforms would provide the only safe place to land and build on this world. The research opportunities on this planet would outstrip anything previously encountered.

@@Orbit
Even using primitive telescopes, the giant orbiting platforms are visible from  the surface of Funestis. The leading theory is that this system was once home to a technologically advanced alien civilization, and they built the platforms. While the fate of this species is unknown, the scientific opportunities offered by the equipment and even the trash they left behind are beyond imagination. The orbiting platforms also offer strategic bases for military operations.

@@Pillage
The terrain improvements built by other civilizations (cultivation, refineries, roads, etc.) can be destroyed by moving a unit into the improved terrain square and ordering the unit to pillage. This reduces the production value of the land, and forces your enemy to re-develop the terrain.

Units can be ordered to pillage by holding down the shift key and pressing "P", or by choosing the "Pillage" command from the Orders menu. The unit must be ordered to pillage once for each of the terrain improvements you want to destroy. A fully developed terrain square (tohubohu with a slideway, for example) must be pillaged four times in order to remove all improvements.

@@Planetary Base
When Forward Vectoring allows interplanetary travel to become commonplace, facilities designed for mere orbital flights are no longer capable of handling the traffic. Even if you ignore the inherent safety problems--small launch pads, insufficient exhaust venting systems, and so on--the sheer volume of flights is enough to swamp the older bases. A Planetary Base is a larger, more modern launch campus, which makes possible reliable travel between Funestis and Naumachia, with stops in Orbit no more than a minor detour.

@@Refinery
Though a ground level survey will occasionally find deposits of useful metals, most of the surface deposits on Funestis seem to have been exhausted by a previous civilization. We have been forced to rely on methods of removing metals from the land and from the traces that empire left behind.

A Refinery increases the materiel production of most types of terrain, though some show no improvement. (We can only guess that the ancients did not settle those areas.) Order settler-type units to erect a refinery by pressing the "M" key, or by choosing the "Build Refinery" command from the Orders menu.

@@Rifts
One of the ways that we know these orbital platforms are far older than any civilization currently extant on Funestis is the state of disrepair. Jagged rifts, some of them running long distances, have appeared over the millennia, probably caused by coincidental accumulation of micrometeorite damage in certain areas. Though you might expect that these ragged tears would hamper travel, the opposite is in fact true. In the sometimes disorienting free fall environment, any path is an aid to navigation. These breaks in the structure also allow us to study the internal workings of the platforms, which supplies additional data.

@@River
Fed by natural springs, snow melt, and small tributary streams, rivers flow from mountains and other upland sources into larger rivers, lakes, and oceans. Rivers can be found in almost any terrain, from the wettest to the most arid. Since the beginning of recorded time, towns and cities have grown up around rivers, because the land in river valleys is usually very fertile and well-suited for farming. In addition, a river provides easy and quick access between towns for trade and travel. Water can be channeled from rivers for the purposes of irrigation. Rivers are also good sources of mineral resources, and can provide power to run machinery and generate electrical energy.

@@Roads
A network of good quality roads improves travel between cities. Roads are important to every civilization for trade and the movement of troops. As technology grows, improved roads become possible. Modern, paved roads are passable in almost any type of weather, and can be traversed much more quickly than early dirt roads.

To have a settler-type unit build a road, press the "R" key or select the "Build Road" command from the Orders menu. Roads can be built on almost any ground terrain (not at sea). However, they cannot be safely built over a river square until you have figured out how to control localized flooding. Units moving along roads expend only one third of a movement point per square, regardless of terrain type. Roads also increase the amount of Data produced by some types of terrain.

@@Science
The amount of scientific research contributed by a city is indicated by icons in the City Display. At the start of each turn, the science output of each city is added to the research project currently in progress, eventually resulting in the discovery of a new Civilization Advance. The more science each city produces, the faster new Advances are discovered. The amount of science produced by your civilization is primarily determined by the amount of incoming Data you have allocated to science. This percentage can be adjusted by selecting the "Change Tax Rate" command on the Kingdom menu.

The science output of individual cities and your civilization as a whole can also be increased by building certain City Improvements and Wonders of the World, or by converting citizens into Scientists.

@@Sentry
Units ordered to go on sentry duty appear as gray silhouettes. These units are removed from the movement queue, and remain on sentry duty until another unit moves into their sight range or until they are manually reactivated. Units on sentry duty inside a city are automatically loaded onto ships (up to the ship's unit carrying capacity) when the ship leaves the city.

Units are placed on sentry duty by pressing the "S" key, or by choosing the "Sentry" option on the Orders menu. Damaged units placed on sentry inside a city become active when they have been completely repaired.

@@Service Pads
After the discovery of Spacecraft, your settler-type units have the ability to construct Service Pads. These act as remote refueling stations for air units. Strategically placed Service Pads effectively extend the range of these units, allowing them to operate farther from friendly cities and Flattops.

@@Slideways
Slideways revolutionize transportation by providing a cheap, fast, friction-free method of moving people, raw materials, finished goods, and troops over great distances. Not only do they support and encourage industrial growth by dramatically reducing transport time and costs, they also spur technological research. Frictionless slideways are among the first great ultramodern conveniences.

To have a settler-type unit build a slideway (after the discovery of Frictionless Surfaces), move the unit onto terrain containing a road, then press the "R" key or select the "Build Slideway" command from the Orders menu. Units moving along a slideway expend no movement points. Slideways increase a terrain's Materiel and Data production by 50 percent (rounded down).

@@Specialists
The citizen icons displayed in the Population Roster of the City Display represent the city's work force. Each citizen added to the roster is automatically put to work developing one of the terrain squares within the city radius. In certain situations, it might become necessary to remove a citizen from terrain production in order to perform a specific task. Citizens so removed are called specialists. There are three types of specialist, each of which increases one of the three components of Data produced by a city. Entertainers increase Entertainment, Samplers increase income (taxes), and Researchers increase Science production.

To create a specialist, click on any producing square in the City Map. The production icons disappear from the square, and an Entertainer appears in the Population Roster. To create a Sampler, click the Entertainer icon once. To create a Researcher, first create a sampler, then click the Sampler icon once. Cities must be size five or larger to support Samplers and Researchers.

@@SSTO Pad
When the Spacecraft advance allows you to begin building spacecraft, the common Service Pad is not well enough equipped to handle the sort of launch and landing efforts required for orbital flights. Though all air units can still use the Service Pad as before, it is the SSTO (Single Stage To Orbit) Pad that allows you to launch spaceworthy units to and return them from the Orbit space surrounding Funestis. Note that SSTO Pads can only be constructed in certain advantageous spots--locations that correspond to one of the orbiting platforms. This eases the transition to orbit and is the only factor that makes the pads cost effective.

@@Taxes
The Data Taxes (measured in Base Pairs) collected in a city are indicated by Bp in the City Display. Taxes are used primarily to pay the maintenance cost of City Improvements each turn. Any tax revenues not used for maintenance of Improvements are added to your treasury. The amount of Taxes generated by the city is primarily determined by the amount of incoming Data you have allocated to Taxes. This can be adjusted by selecting the "Change Tax Rate" option from the Kingdom menu.

Tax revenues can also be increased through the construction of certain City Improvements and Wonders of the World, or by converting citizens into Samplers.

@@Instaport
After your technology is sufficiently advanced, you have the ability to perform Instaport operations between your cities. Instaporting allows you to move ground units instantly over great distances on the same map, but not between maps. In order to Instaport a unit between two cities, both cities must have an Instaporter.

To Instaport a unit, move the unit into a city with an Instaporter and choose "Instaport" from the Orders menu, or press the "l" key. A menu of possible destinations appears. Choose the destination city from the menu, and the unit is instantly transported to that city. The unit becomes available for use on the following turn.

@@Trade Routes
Trade routes are established by moving a trade unit into a city at least ten squares from the unit's home city. You receive an immediate Bp payment on the turn that the route is established. On each ensuing turn, the two cities each receive a Data bonus for as long as the trade route exists. The farther apart the two cities are, the more valuable the trade route. Trade routes established with cities of a rival civilization tend to be more profitable than those established between friendly cities. Each city may have up to three active trade routes at any time.

@@Transforming Terrain
In addition to the changes to Terrain that can be made through cultivation and refineries, advanced settler-type units (Melior and Environeer) are able to transform map squares into radically different Terrain types using the "Transform" command on the Orders menu. Terrain transformation is particularly useful if the Terrain surrounding a city doesn't produce sufficient resources.

See the Civilopedia entries for each Terrain type for the results of transformation.

@@Unhappiness Due to Cities
Once you have built a certain number of cities, your citizens start to worry about your ability to effectively govern your civilization. When this occurs, additional unhappy citizens appear in each city.

The number of cities you can build before causing additional unhappiness is based on a number of factors, including game difficulty level and government type. The number of cities is higher for more advanced governments and lower levels of difficulty.

@@Veteran Units
During the American Civil War, soldiers who had never been in battle were said to have "seen the elephant" after being under fire for the first time. Afterward, they were considered veterans. History shows that well-trained, veteran soldiers are much more likely to survive a battle than inexperienced troops.

Units have a 50 percent chance of becoming Veterans each time they survive a combat encounter. Cities with certain Improvements automatically produce Veteran units of specific types, as do all cities under the influence of the MILQUETOAST Wonder. The attack and defense factors of Veteran units is increased by 50 percent.


@This must be here to terminate search!!!
