; Civilization II The test of Time
; Civilopedia Descriptions
; Fantasy Game
; Copyright (c) 1999 MicroProse Software/Hasbro Interactive
;

@ADVANCE_DESCRIPTIONS
;
; The index is a mapping to the rules file. The labels to the right are the entries, IN ORDER,
; that are in the rules.txt file. The number to the left is the description below that
; corresponds to the rules entry. For example, Amphibious Warfare will be the 55'th (remember,
; the list is zero based) description below beginning with @@.
; Only ONE entry per line, number MUST BE TERMINATED WITH A COMMA.
; The list must terminate with a -2. A  indicates no description, do not list or index.
;
@@ADVANCE_INDEX
0,			;Reidmar's Compact
1,			;Sagas
2,			;Sea Raids
3,			;Astrology
4,			;Weirding Call
5,			;Summon Sea Beast
6,			;The Guild
7,			;Bridge Building
8,			;Ironsmithy
9,			;Ritual Burial
10,			;Alchemy
11,			;Swine Array
12,			;King's Code
13,			;Feat of Arms
14,			;Magical Incantation
15,			;Commune
16,			;Clockworks
17,			;Dragon Study
18,			;Megalithic Tombs
19,			;The Hanse
20,			;Coinage
21,			;Greatlaw
22,			;Trading League
23,			;Thaumaturgy
24,			;Aether Control
25,			;Engineering
26,			;Nature Lore
27,			;Espionage
28,			;Eldritch Lore
29,			;Fealty
30,			;Witchcraft
31,			;Fanaticism
32,			;Arcane Arts
33,			;Transmogrification
34,			;General Uprisings
35,			;Heraldry
36,			;Horse Breeding
37,			;Mercantilism
38,			;Invention
39,			;Weaponry
40,			;Thunderbolt Spell
41,			;Moonstone
42,			;I Viking
43,			;Runes
44,			;Blackpowder
45,			;Bearing Plate
46,			;Celestial Navigation
47,			;Masonry
48,			;Fortified Ley Lines
49,			;Mathematics
50,			;Chivalry
51,			;Metalworking
52,			;World Exploration
53,			;Summon Ice Drake
54,			;Monarchy
55,			;Druid Lore
56,			;Wood Lore
57,			;Astrolabe
58,			;Thor's Fire
59,			;Magic Lore
60,			;Natural Philosophy
61,			;Metaphysics
62,			;Fairy Fabric
63,			;Sea Lore
64,			;Festivals
65,			;Dagda's Gift
66,			;Warp Spell
67,			;Transposition Spell
68,			;Soil Enhancement
69,			;Elemental Energy
70,			;Dragon's Teeth
71,			;Althing
72,			;Spell of Animation
73,			;Fireball Incantation
74,			;Architecture
75,			;Shipbuilding
76,			;Huginn and Muninn
77,			;Skidbladnir
78,			;Iron Foundry
79,			;Armor Plate
80,			;Rod of Shivers
81,			;Siegecraft
82,			;New Religion
83,			;The Niebelungenlied
84,			;Trade
85,			;Theurgy
86,			;Warcraft
87,			;Beast Dominion
88,			;Ideograms
89,			;Hang. fr Yggdrasil
-1,			;Styg. city prereq1
-1,			;Styg. city prereq2
90,			;Ragnarok
-1,			;Mer. city prereq.
-1,			;Gob. city prereq.
91,			;Ally with Dwarves
92,			;Dragon Lore
93,			;Dragon Language
94,			;Ally with Dragons
95,			;Ally w Frost Giants
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Reidmar's Compact
Reidmar is the great god of weaponry who keeps all of the war tools of the pantheon of gods in peak condition. When he turns his great grinding wheel, charged sparks spew forth in all directions on paths that never end. If you can use your magic to befriend him, he will agree to collect many of these enchanted embers for your use. They just happen to be the critical element needed for making astral portals and lightning bolts.

@@Sagas
This collection of oral tales describes the terrible history of Midgard from the perspective of each of the races that inhabits its fantastic realms. To know these stories is to take the first step toward discovering the different branches of learning that will enable your race to move forward.

@@Sea Raids
Sea Raids represent an important intermediate step in the development of a seafaring peoples. As a result of the valuable experience gained by launching seagoing expeditions, a tight corps of veteran sailors arise able to defend their nation from all manner of sea attacks.

@@Astrology
From their celestial home in Asgard, floating high above the earthly domains of Midgard, the gods have left innumerable portents and omens sprinkled among the stars. They have accomplished this by excavating tiny holes in the firmament that give glimpses to their wonderful, brilliant land beyond. After much study of the stars, magicians and sages can learn to interpret these valuable divine messages for the benefit of their peoples. This discipline has come to be known as Astrology.

@@Weirding Call
Many creatures find the weirding call irresistable, even hypnotic. They can hear it wherever they may be and cannot resist its summons. Anyone who learns the nature of the call and can reproduce it will be able to draft a powerful fighter to his side. The single drawback that prevents its indiscriminate use is the effort needed to make it. However, many strategists still think it well worth the cost.

@@Summon Sea Beast
There exists in the mysterious undersea world a substance distilled from the rare mauve kelp that is irresistable to the giant kraken when mixed with the saliva of pure mermaidens. With this concoction, the Merfolk can command these sea beasts. Domesticating the kelp has proved the final obstacle to overcome in extracting useful amounts of this amazing material. Once sufficient quanitities are being produced, the Merfolk can summon the sea beast when needed. An unexpected side effect of this kelp extract is its ablity to enhance the efficiency of ley lines.

@@The Guild
At some point, artisans and merchants realized that they could improve the profitability of their craft by creating guilds and endowing them with the authority to enforce minimum standards of workmanship. Trade in guild articles blossomed when the clientele realized that they no longer needed to assume any risk in their transactions. Once regularity in trade became established, the merchant fraternity began to explore other ways to improve commerce such as the Hanse, mercantilism, and even a new type of government that promoted the benefits of the commercial way of life - Greatlaw.

@@Bridge Building
All of the races have been constructing crude bridges from the first time they laid logs across a stream or lava river they needed to cross. Although a brick arch bridge is said to have existed in Rot in 1800 First Age, most bridges of this time period were probably made of haunted wood because of its resistance to fire. The Frost Giants developed bridge building to a degree that it took the other races many years to match. Giant bridges are often composed of several stone arches which support a flat road. Bridges of this type date back to as early as 219 First Age. It wasn't until the mid-1800s of the Second Age that bridge designs began to incorporate alchemical materials for added strength and permanence. Early truss bridges used wooden trusses bound with iron tie-rods. By 1850 Second Age, wooden trusses gave way to electrum. Modern bridges incorporate designs ranging from concrete and electrum arches to billon girders and suspensions of gold and platinum. The development of modern ley line bridges constructed of durable materials was vital to the expansion of the worlds ley line systems.

@@Ironsmithy
Some examples of iron ornamentation date back to 4000 First Age, but the use of iron for tools, weapons, and other practical purposes did not become common until much later. Prior to this time, obsidian was the most widely used material for such purposes. Iron is more common than both copper and tin, the component metals of bronze, but iron is seldom found in a free state; it is most commonly found mixed with other minerals and elements. In order to be used, the iron must be separated from the ore. Once this technique was developed, and forges hot enough to melt the iron were developed, iron working became commonplace. Worked iron is harder, less brittle, and can hold a much sharper edge than bronze. Iron has remained an important metal for edged weapons throughout history.

@@Ritual Burial
Searching for an explanation of the apparently capricious world around them, the earliest sentient beings to inhabit Midgard developed the first concepts of religion. Gradually, rites of worship grew to include sacrifices, ceremonies, vigils, symbology, sacred items, and prayer. One significant step in the advance of worship was the ritual burial, often a ceremonial preparation of the deceased's body for the afterlife his or her culture anticipated. The remains of ritual burials offer some of the most detailed information about early beliefs of the different races.

@@Alchemy
Many of the sagas mention a secret magical procedure known only to the gods that let them take a base metal, like lead, and transmute it into gold. Some magicians of Midgard believe that they , too, can partake of this miraculous ability and, so, have spent much of their time in study and experimentation to ensure a claim for a share of this enormous wealth-producing enterprise. They have classified these efforts with the name of Alchemy. Even though the secret has remained perpetually elusive, the alchemists' efforts have not been entirely without fruit and many of the most important magical breakthroughs known today have been accidental consequences of these, so far, futile attempts for instant fortune.

@@Swine Array
As tactics have evolved from the desultory melee that characterized the earliest conflicts to the organized maneuvers seen today, nothing has brought more fear into an opposing army than the appearance of the infamous assault formation popularly known as the Swine Array. Once it starts in motion, its momentum is such that nothing can stand in its way - just like the charge of an enraged boar. One can only hope to divert it to an insignificant portion of the battlefield. Arnwin, the famous ranger and military strategist, proves beyond dispute in his masterpiece, The Art Of Battle, that the Swine Array is the most efficient use of fighting energy possible.

@@King's Code
All societies in all realms require some kind of governing code capable of maintaining the large social organizations needed for any grand endeavor. Sophisticated governments such as monarchies and althings and systematic activities such as trade or education cannot expect to survive without such a body of laws in place. Usually these codes need the sponsorship of a king to invest the weight of authority sufficient for them to operate effectively.

@@Feat of Arms
Often a demonstration of military panoply, a feat of arms so to speak, can be a convincing argument to militant creatures or gods of your worthiness to receive their blessings. For the Buteo peoples, the griffin is particularly susceptible to this kind of exhortation.

@@Magical Incantation
How one intones a spell is just as important as the meaning of the words themselves. To reach the higher realms of magical prowess, the wizard's guild of any society must discover the mysteries of magical incantation. Only then can they reap the maximum benefits of the more powerful spells.

@@Commune
The commune is the political organization of the poor and disaffected. By dividing all citizenry into autonomous cells of equal political weight, revolutionary leaders are able to convince the masses that the hierarchical structure they had suffered under before has now been completely destroyed. This pyschological advantage enables them to instill a revolutionary fervor that can accomplish miracles, at least for a short while.

@@Clockworks
Clockworks comprise the tiny geared wheels and springs that are the essential components of the perpetual motion machinery that power all alchemy workshops. Although magic receives almost all of the attention in alchemy breakthroughs, nothing could have been accomplished without the busy whirring and clicking of the clockworks keeping the laboratories running day after day .

@@Dragon Study
In times of war, the ability to convince the dragon race to ally with you practically guarantees victory. These are the most powerful of all creatures inhabiting Midgard and are virtually invincible in battle. However, you first need to learn their habits and peculiar ways if you hope to convince them of the sincerety of your overtures of friendship.
Dragon Study can furnish other benefits as well. For example, untold numbers of practically impervious dragon scales litter the surface world of Midgard. How to effectively join them to form the armor of siege engines without initiating destructive backfires is impossible without the knowledge of dragon morphology .

@@Megalithic Tombs
These grandiose ritualistic arrangements of giant stones that dot the landscape are places of veneration by all races of the great war heroes who are buried within. All religions recognize that their gods look favorably upon races who erect these monuments since those so entombed are destined to rise to Asgard to join the army being assembled for the inevitable battle against the titans of nature.

@@The Hanse
As effective as the guilds have been in improving trade, a supervisory organization such as The Hanse has brought the level of commercial regulation to an unforseen high level of efficiency. This has had a side benefit of freeing large number of artisans to investigate new areas of research such as energy manipulation. The Hanse has also undertaken to back new coins made from base metals so that a sufficient number of coins can be minted to fuel the marketplace without undermining faith heretofore reserved for gold coins.

@@Coinage
As cities grew, their internal economies became more complicated. Many of the inhabitants became specialists, some primarily producing grain, some pottery, some magic wands, etc. A system of barter developed, so that one individual's wares and services could be exchanged for those of another. Gold and silver were widely used in such transactions, but the pieces needed to be weighed and tested for purity each time they changed hands. In 600 First Age, the Dwarves found a way around this problem. They began the practice of shaping electrum, an alloy of gold and silver, into pieces of predetermined weight and purity, stamped with an official symbol. This idea caught on, and within 50 years all the important trading centers of Midgard had adopted similar practices. The widespread use of currency created universal standards of value, allowing people from various races and societies to conduct business almost anywhere without being forced to bring along bulky goods for trade and barter.

@@Greatlaw
As living conditions improve, the daily fight for survival becomes a less all-consuming preoccupation. All of the races, even the goblins and trolls, have begun to find more time for leisure over the last few centuries. Inevitably, their attention would be focussed on government and how it dispenses laws and justice. Parallelling the growth of trade and the corresponding need for protecting mercantile interests of a rising middle class, many governments have begun to embrace more democratic institutions. The needs of many individuals might now be considered instead of an elite few designated to guard the nation. The most democratic system of all has been called Greatlaw since it springs from the great common voice of the peoples. Greatlaw nations find that production in all areas increase dramatically but at a cost of less preparedness for battles and war.

@@Trading League
The Trading League is a necessary intermediate step between Guilds and The Hanse. By organizing guilds into more powerful leagues, a race can establish tolls and earn sufficient prestige to ask the gods' favor in erecting a pearl obelisk.

@@Thaumaturgy
Thaumaturgy represents an important step in the advancement of magic. The ability to work miracles is critical to the discovery of several magical activities such as sowing dragon teeth, learning to make the weirding call, and controlling the aether. In addition, it is needed to fuse armor into a mold that perfectly fits the intended wearer's body.

@@Aether Control
A tremendous amount of energy, magical or otherwise, exists in the aether of the sky. The ability to harness it takes a great amount of skill of the magician. Once successful, he can accomplish a great many things. He can direct the winds to fill the sails of ships about to start on great voyages. He can concentrate the dispersed energy used by the gods to make lightning and direct it to Circles of Summoning. He can channel other mystical energies to empower the alchemical guilds. Altogether, Aether Control is a very valuable magical skill.

@@Engineering
Engineering is the application of scientific and mathematical principles to the design and/or manufacture of theoretical systems and physical objects. Although completely non-magical in approach, engineering, nevertheless, can be synergetically enhanced with magic and vice versa. All major engineering functions are carried out by Dwarves. Their work involves the construction of roads, bridges, fortifications, and the performance of other duties relating to the military. Dwarves and Goblin miners can build tunnels and have managed to carve out the great cavities that exist underground. Today, there are engineers specifically trained in nearly every field, from alchemy to clockworks.

@@Nature Lore
The understanding of nature is a long and arduous undertaking that can ultimately reap tremendous returns for the investigator. The cleanest and most useful type of power found in the universe emanates directly from the fabric of the natural world. With a complete understanding of her workings, the specialist can build a crystal pyramid to tap into this best of all possible powers.

@@Espionage
As far back as 500 First Age, the Elvish military strategist Bolomir stressed the military importance of gathering of covert information about one's enemies. He discovered that the race of fairies were the only creatures sufficiently adept at infiltration and subterfuge to undertake these dangerous missions. So far, only the elves and humans have managed to convince these innocent but loyal beings to put their special skills to use. They have been known to work for the other races for the right price, however.

@@Eldritch Lore
A large portion of magic falls within the realm of the weird and eerie. The name, Eldritch Lore, has been given to the study of this arcane area of the magical arts. It is the critical foundation upon which the entire structure of war magic rests. If you wish to explore the military capabilities of magic then you must first master Eldritch Lore. Likely because of their own unearthly nature, the Stygians have a great affinity for this kind of magic.

@@Fealty
At some point in the early history of Midgard, village and nomadic chiefs discovered the advantages of banding together for mutual defense. These occasions were often marked with oaths of fealty and the exchange of gold rings to symbolize the permanence of the compact. Unknown at the time, alliances of this type marked the first step away from the small social structure of village or wandering tribe toward the creation of higher and more stable social and military organizations. Thereafter, it became practicable to support veteran military units whose sole occupation was fighting.

@@Witchcraft
Stories of witchcraft and its affinity for black magic have been told from time immemorial. The Niebelungenlied, in particular, is a font of information revealing many mysteries of this ancient art. Because of their alliance to the dark side, only Stygian practitioners can become Witches; and only Goblins and Stygians can control the Great Bats; but, for some unknown reason, any male of any race can use witchcraft to become a warlock.

@@Fanaticism
There is something in the emotional makeup of goblins and infidels that attracts them to more fundamentalist types of beliefs and behaviors. Particularly dangerous are the fanatical military sects that may seize control of their government in order to undertake religious crusades in the names of their gods. The other races seem untouched by these extreme beliefs and prefer to keep their religious leaders segregated from their military forces. (Only goblins and infidels may possess Fanaticism.)

@@Arcane Arts
Mastering the Arcane Arts raises one to the highest level of magical knowledge now possible. With this wisdom, who knows what secrets may be uncovered? Some practitioners even predict that the ultimate mystery of Yggdrasil, the universal tree of life will finally be revealed.

@@Transmogrification
Transmogrification describes the magical process whereby dragon scales are transformed into a very bitter magical potion. When diluted with wine in a very elaborate ceremony to make a concoction called sangreal, it dramatically increases the happiness and devotion of the partakers. For many religions, transmogrification is the most important ritual in its calendar.

@@General Uprisings
The history of Midgard is replete with peasant uprisings intent upon bringing down repressive regimes. For the most part, these revolts don't have either the organization or acumen to make a lasting impact. But, even in failure, lessons may be learned and eventually rebel leaders discovered that using hit-and-run tactics, with its emphasis on small victories, proved a more effective strategy in the long run than an all-or-nothing stake upon a single decisive battle.

@@Heraldry
Heraldry signifies an important milestone in the progress of the military arts. The display of individual coats of arms, banners, and other identifiable devices on the persons of military leaders more easily distinguish them and their authority from the mass of troops on a battlefield. Ordinary soldiers can orient themselves to a standard bearer or officer thereby enabling them to better respond to orders. Heraldry becomes especially helpful in battles obscured by smoke spewing bombards where their bright colors and patterns are the only objects one can easily recognize.

@@Horse Breeding
The horse was first domesticated for transportation and warfare by tribesmen on the Infidel steppes. These peoples used their superior mobility and speed to overwhelm the proto-civilizations just rising elsewhere in Midgard. Soon after, a new breed of horse was developed that could carry a warrior fully encased in armor. Quickly, horses spread throughout much of the surface world. It was not long before nearly every race had put horses to work as field animals and as a means of transportation. Horses also have played an important role in the military conflicts of nearly every war in the world, both as mounts for horsemen and cavalry, and as draft animals for pulling war chariots and heavy weapons into battle. Surprisingly, no amount of breeding has been able to remove from this fidgity animal a fear of enclosed spaces.

@@Mercantilism
With the establishment of guilds, many races began to recognize the myriad advantages offered by a mercantile lifestyle. Soon a brand new world of wealth, luxury, and knowedge was opening up to them. These commercial societies were able to acquire magical artifacts from their trading expeditions, dabble in new and improved methods of manufacture, and tolerate even more sophisticated social institutions.

@@Invention
The contrivance of a previously unknown device, method, or process which can, in turn, be used to accomplish an objective in ways thought to be impossible, is known as invention. Essentially, inventiveness is the ability to take one or more newly discovered concepts and find a way to put them to practical use. The earliest inventions date back to ancient stone and metal tools used for hunting, digging, and other everyday tasks and primitive wands which absorbed Thor's thunderbolts. After ideograms allowed the ideas of various races to be exchanged and studied, inventions became increasingly more useful and innovative. Most inventions are geared toward improving or simplifying existence in some way. Often, inventions themselves make it possible to make new discoveries, which then go on to inspire better and more innovative inventions.

@@Weaponry
The earliest warriors had little choice but to use whatever primitive weapons they could fashion with the materials at hand. What they really needed to advance to the next level of effectiveness was the use of a standardized weapon that would always perform predictably in the heat of battle. With one in hand, military leaders could then impose uniform training, and, as a consequence, a more sophisticated level of tactical organization and maneuver - all of which greatly increased their chances of success on the battlefield. Weaponry is the science of forging metals and other materials into durable weapons. Upon acquiring this knowledge, every race is immediately able to put a superior warrior onto the field.

@@Thunderbolt Spell
Without doubt, the Thunderbolt and Fireball constiute the two greatest weapons in the arsenal of war magic. The possessor of the Thunderbolt spell can invoke a jagged piece of magical energy and throw it a great distance in any direction. A single mighty bolt has been known to fell a dragon in its tracks.

@@Moonstone
Moonstone is the only substance known that can thwart a fireball attack. Its unusual properties include complete invisibility except in moonlight when it acquires a very purplish tint, complete permeability to any moving material except fire, and complete porosity to aether and water. All of these unusual quailities permit magicians to build huge hemispheric shields of this material that can cover entire cities. In no way is the ordinary citizen even aware of its existence in his everyday activities. Send a fireball toward it, however, and it will absorb every last bit of energy without fail.

@@I Viking
Those races that can master the dual military attainments of Swine Array and Blackpowder may consider studying the formidable combined arms strategies demonstrated by the military genius, Eric Blacksword, in his famous underworld campaign and popularly referred to as I Viking. Just the reputation of knowing how to conduct I Viking campaigns can convince valuable creatures to join your side.

@@Runes
Runes have become the alphabet of choice for both scholars and magicians. As soon as the magic qualities of its letters were recognized, Runes rapidly replaced Ideograms as the popular method of written expression. With the magical power of the written word, many new fields of learning have become possible to the races who have learned to read and write in Runes. All important texts are now written in Runes in the belief that they will enhance the power of the message. Without the knowledge of runes, one cannot hope to continue for long in the pursuit of scientific and magical advancements.

@@Blackpowder
Blackpowder is a chemical mixture of saltpeter, sulfur, and charcoal. When ignited, it burns rapidly and explodes if restrained to any degree. The discovery of blackpowder has led to the invention of the Bombard, which can quickly reduce a fortified town to rubble. Blackpowder has marked one of the major technological turning points in military history, significantly changing the way wars are fought.

@@Bearing Plate
The Bearing Plate is an important navigational instrument essential for deep sea exploration. It is capable of both finding north and determining sea depth. Before its invention, no shipbuilder would ever consider constructing a submersible ship for fear that it would either lose its way or implode under tremendous sea pressure. With a Bearing Plate on board, the shield boat now has the ability to descend the sea depths to explore the land of the Merfolk.

@@Celestial Navigation
Before any navigational instruments were invented, sailors relied on the position of the stars to find their way at sea. Over the centuries elaborate tables of star positions have been prepared to enable a navigator to better fix his position. While relying entirely on the stars to find one's way can prove to be a dangerous undertaking - extended periods of bad weather might prove fatal - celestial navigation, nevertheless, allows great freedom in sea travel.

@@Masonry
The early dwellings of most of the races were built of materials that were readily available and easy to work with, such as bricks of clay, natural stone, coral, or fused stalagmites. As races gave up their nomadic ways and settled the first cities, they soon found that they had a need for more permanent and durable structures. The skill of masonry was developed to fill this need. The earliest stone structures consisted of little more than rocks which were stacked atop one another to form crude walls. Artisans soon began to square off the rocks, forming them into regular shapes and stacking them. These early examples of masonry used no mortar; the weight of the stacked stones provided overall strength and stability. Without the use of mortar and knowledge of architectural techniques, masonry was used primarily for simple structures such as fortifications. However, some examples of early masonry are quite spectacular, including the Stonehenge, which is still standing thousands of years after being built.

@@Fortified Ley Lines
One of the most corrosive magical objects in existence is a ley line network. Whenever they receive heavy use by the local population they severely corrode the countryside around them. Fortunately, after much study, a magician has discovered a spell which he has named Fortified Ley Lines that tempers the impact of corrosion while still permitting full use of the ley lines. It is especially effective in conjunction with the bestiary since now the beasts can dispose of corrosion much more quickly. It is not a simple spell to learn, however, and goodly knowledge of other magic is required before one can make an attempt at it.

@@Mathematics
Rudimentary arithmetic was purely quantitative, used to keep track of quantities and measurements in trade. Building on this fundamental base, ancient civilizations began to formulate more complex mathematical concepts. Very early on, the Merfolk had developed a system for working with fractional numbers and simple algebraic problems. They also formulated geometric formulae for finding area and volume, and came up with a constant for determining the area of a circle that was very close to the value of merpi. Buteo mathematicians have greatly contributed to both geometry and algebra. Inevitably, mathematics was applied to other sciences and fields of study such as astrology and clockworks. One of the earliest applications of mathematical principles was in the construction of complex weaponry such as the catapult.

@@Chivalry
Chivalry is a code of rules governing the behavior of an aristocratic class of warriors variously known as knights, paladins, golden horde, etc. depending upon the parent race. First appearing in the Second Age, the rules of chivalry have governed not only the knights' behavior in battle, but in their personal lives as well. The chief chivalric virtues of piety, honor, valor, courtesy, chastity, and loyalty represent a fusion of religious and military morality. Chivalry has given rise to the popular martial entertainment known as the Royal Joust which can do wonders for keeping a city populace content in their lot.

@@Metalworking
The ability to fashion beautiful objects, both practical and decorative, from metal is highly prized by all races. Depending upon the skill of the maker a great deal of magic can be infused into his handiwork. The absolute masters of metalworking are the dwarves. There is a ceremonial, even supernatural, element in their work that makes it the most desired of all. The magical component of metalworking has an influence in other forms of magic, most notably, Thaumaturgy and Dragon Study.

@@World Exploration
Once you are able to control the winds and defend your ships with blackpowder weapons, the whole world and its secrets will open up to your explorations. New contacts and friendships with heretofore unknown races can dramatically improve your trade. You will need to indicate your port cities to your new trading partners with the appropriate temples, though.

@@Summon Ice Drake
Almost as powerful as a dragon and much easier to coerce to your side, the Ice Drake is an invaluable ally able to destroy your enemies and protect your towns. He will respond to this summons if you are willing to invest the resources needed to invoke it.

@@Monarchy
Rule by monarchy has developed as a logical extension of the despotic rule of tribal chieftains. Many of the earliest monarchs, such as those in west Midgard, claimed that they ruled by divine right. In the spread of monarchy, however, rulership was generally conveyed upon a leader who could most effectively raise and command an army. Monarchies are dynastic, with rule of the nation passing to the eldest son when the king dies or retires. Monarchs have absolute rule over their subjects, severely limiting the personal and economic freedom of all citizens except for nobility and the rich upper-class. Although monarchies have proven a far superior form of government than Despotism, they still are incapable of adjusting to the speed of changing economies and are generally considered less efficient with respect to production than the more representative forms of government, such as Althing and Greatlaw.

@@Druid Lore
A very powerful and mysterious force (some believe several distinct synergistic forces) exists between all living things. This force has a very positive effect on one's emotional and mental states when properly imbibed. Through the study of Druid Lore, one attmpts to understand and effectively tap these forces for the mutual benefit of society. Success in this endeavor depends in large part upon the reverence with which these studies are undertaken. Respect for all life, from the mighty sky tree to the humble monopede, is the critical element. Great monastic brotherhoods have developed whose sole object is to celebrate nature and channel the resulting life forces for the use of their congregations.

@@Wood Lore
Understanding nature and, particularly, the ways of the great forests provides an important key to the development of practical philosophies and magical awareness. Only with a firm grasp of Wood Lore, can scholars and magicians advance to more sophisticated sciences and magic. Knowledge of Wood Lore is especially helpful in the study of Astrology and Natural Philosophy. The great wizard, Merlin, was the champion of the great forests and will bless and advise those who build a shrine to the woodlands.

@@Astrolabe
Celestial Navigation relies heavily on accurate measurements. Even the slightest error in calculating the altitude of a star can put a ship many miles off course. The posession of the Astrolabe pratically eliminates any chance for miscalculation. Seafaring races who acquire this revolutionary navigational instrument suddenly can conduct much longer sea journeys than they had ever attempted before. Larger ships able to withstand the rigors of these extended sea voyages then prove practicable to build.

@@Thor's Fire
Thor is the great weather god who hammers out powerful thunderbolts and fireballs of war on his forge in the sky. If you can coerce the secret from him, you can learn the technique of making the Thunderbolt and the Fireball for your own ends. However, first you must demonstrate to him high standards of fighting and magical abilities before you ever hope to gain his ear.

@@Magic Lore
Before you can command the incredible power of white magic, you must first thoroughly understand its history and traditions. Those who learn the lore of white magic have the capability to do many wondrous things. Only onsider, as one example, the usefulness of conjuring nexuses that can enhance the production of resources in your villages and cities. You will also need Magic Lore to handle moonstone and to dabble in the Arcane Arts.

@@Natural Philosophy
From the moment the various races developed a self-awareness, they wondered about the seemingly chaotic world about them and its careless disregard for their well-being. If they could only discover underlying principles that might extract order out of the confusion and capriciousness they encountered everywhere about them, they might better manage their lives and, correspondingly, their chances of survival. So began the science of Natural Philosophy. It is extremely important for any society to cultivate some kind of philosophy from which they can develop other branches of knowledge. Without one they can only live for the moment with no hope of building a body of organized knowledge.

@@Metaphysics
There exists in every sentient creature a visceral yearning to understand why and how he came to be and for what purpose, if any. The study of Metaphysics attempts to find solutions to these fundamental questions and, in the process, provide a more coherent direction to the expenditure of social energies. The benefits of this are enormous and can lead to advances in the totally disparate fields as magic, engineering, and invention.

@@Fairy Fabric
An invisible network of infinitesimal threads pervades all of the worlds of Midgard. It can't be seen, felt, smelt, heard, or tasted but, nevertheless, it exists. It is the handiwork of the fairies and it constitutes the framework upon which all of the white magical energy flows. If you are able to find the fairy fabric, you gain the potential of tapping its energy for use in building engines powerful enough to drive the great siege engine.

@@Sea Lore
Sea Lore is the name given to the record of stories and experiences accumulated over the centuries by the inhabitants of the undersea world. Only the Merfolk are truly interested in the lessons contained in these tales. In particular, they value the passages describing how the giant ray was tamed. They are able to use giant fish in much the same way the surface races use the horse.

@@Festivals
Festivals have always played an important role in religious expression, from early animistic beliefs to the modern organized religions. They usually occur on important religious dates and generally serve a dual role of holiday for the masses and religious observence and celebration of the gods. The success of a religion and the value of its beliefs to societies depend largely upon a stability that underscores the enduring truth of the lessons preached. This stability can often be reinforced by traditional observence of festivals. The happiest societies tend to be those who have evolved with a liberal dose of festival in their religious calendar.

@@Dagda's Gift
Dagda vies with Thor and Odin as one of the greatest gods in the pantheon. He is the god of bounty and owns the Cauldron of Plenty. This wonderful vessel is perpetually full of a tasty mead that causes any partaker to temporarily forget his troubles. Those of his followers who make votive offerings of magic to him gain his blessing on their crops and, if the sacrifice is sufficiently great, the use of his cauldron.

@@Warp Spell
The ability to instantly transport a unit from one city to another even if on the same world can be reckoned one of magic's greatest accomplishments. The acquisition of the Warp Spell empowers any race to build Temporal Portals that allow just that. In addition, these portals have a very positive influence on both the health and fighting abilities of flying units. The Warp Spell is also useful as an important prerequisite for obtaining Reidmar's Compact.

@@Transposition Spell
By an uncanny coincidence, the ability to build physical bridges over bodies of water, enable the practitioner to learn the Transposition Spell which, in effect, permits the construction of a bridge upon the magical technology network. This structure, called the Philosopher's Stone, links two nodes of the net, instantly giving the builder the knowledge of two advances.

@@Soil Enhancement
The damage done to the environment by the corrosions of large magical energy plants can eventually lead to global warming and the permanent relocation of large numbers of flora and fauna. There exists a magic spell with the prosaic name of Soil Enhancement that can be of great help in reducing corrosion. Its main effect is to transform the structure of soil in such a way that it converts any corrosion that spills on it into water. Unfortunately, one problem has been exchanged for another, flooding. This is easily remedied, though, by the construction of Bottomless Wells.

@@Elemental Energy
There are many kinds of energies in Midgard that may be tapped for beneficial use by those who can learn how they work. One important energy, called Elemental Energy, exists in all kinds of matter and can be extracted without altering their properties. For example, one would expect coal placed in a furnace to release an expected amount of energy. If its elemental energy were also, somehow, to be released, it would liberate 50% more total energy. Once the properties of Elemental Energy have been learned, it only takes the fashioning of a Staff Of Power to extract it from any material whenever desired.

@@Dragon's Teeth
Dragon's Teeth have a remarkable ability to grow more food faster than any other farming method known when sown into plowed fields. Two issues prevent anyone from using dragon teeth for this purpose whenever they would want. One - if someone without sufficient magical knowledge attempts to handle these fangs, they will, instead, grow into marauding skeletons. Two - use of dragon's teeth is strictly forbidden until there are Farmers' Markets in place to quickly distribute the surplus harvests. Otherwise, the food will attract barbarian dragons to the area.

@@Althing
As the fruits of trade and the benefits of knowledge began to permeate societies, a prosperous middle class intent on exploiting these advances grew apace. At a certain point they realized that despotic and monarchic forms of government that had proved so useful in protecting them in earlier, more hazardous times, could no longer respond to the demands of their new life. It was inevitable that they would transform councils and advisory groups into small parliamentary institutions, called Althings, that would assume some of the ruler's duties especially in the areas of taxation and regulation of commerce. This partnership has proved economically beneficial to all concerned. The leader now has more time to devote to military and leadership duties while the Althing deals with the regulatory matters. In this transformation, one unforseen drawback has arisen, however. The more influential popular voice has consistently questioned the cost and casualties that result from military campaigns. Althing governments now find it more difficult to keep their populace content when drawn into long foreign wars.

@@Spell of Animation
Imagine all the drudgery of resource production taken out of the hands of the laborers freeing them for more useful pursuits. Consider the benefits you will accrue by increasing resource production by 50%. The Spell of Animation can engender these wonders. Casting this spell causes inanimate objects to suddenly move about. Coal waltzes out of mines straight to the furnace. Grain grows, harvests, mills, and bakes into bread all by itself. Trees fall over and split into perfectly straight boards. To use this wonderful spell effectively, however, you must first organize an Artifact Guild to provide the proper direction otherwise you might find the trees falling over on you.

@@Fireball Incantation
To invoke a fireball against one's enemies bespeaks the ultimate achievement of war magic. This all-powerful magical weapon will totally obliterate anything it strikes even entire cities. To acquire this monumental power, you must have convinced Thor to divulge his secret of fire and possess the knowledge and inner strength to utter the Fireball Incantation without self-destructing.

@@Architecture
Architecture comprises the accumulated body of knowledge of building design. Its comprehension requires a thorough understanding of such diverse disciplines as engineering, wood lore, and even chivalry. The knowledge of Architecture is essential if structures are to be built that enable more people to live useful and happy lives in more constricted spaces. Especially, the lessons of Architecture is integral in the creation of catacombs which support the infrastructure of a city. They cannot hope to grow to any great size otherwise.

@@Shipbuilding
Any attempts to challenge the seas in anything sturdier than a longboat demand a thorough understanding of the art of shipbuilding. Those who would wish to expand their trade to other lands across the seas or supplement their diets with nutritious seafood require large fleets of strongly-built ships able to sail fast and true, carry large cargoes, and withstand terrible storms. Only with the understanding of Shipbuilding, can one attempt to build these fleets. The art of woodmaking obtained from Shipbuilding has also proven critical to the construction of the Jack O'Lanterns.

@@Huginn and Muninn
The most warlike of all the gods, Odin, relies entirely on his two enchanted ravens, Huginn and Muninn, to ferret out what is happening in Midgard. Each morning, the pair travel to every corner of the four worlds in search of useful secrets. Nothing can escape their notice. Each evening, they return to Odin, perch on his shoulders and whisper their report into his ears. Odin will loan these birds to you if he deems you a worthy partner. Note that he admires those who have great skill in war magic and scientific endeavors. If you can gain loan of them, Huginn and Muninn will reveal to you all of the worlds and will help you find the materials needed to build the great siege engine.

@@Skidbladnir
In their preparations for Ragnarok, the climactic battle with the Titans of nature, the gods have created two great magical flying ships which they've named Ellida and Skidbladnir. They would love to impart to you the magical Skidbladnir spell that would allow you to build these powerful ships as well and, thereby, draw you into their conflict as an ally. Before they will consider your request, though, you must prove your worthiness to receive such a valuable boon by demonstrating advanced magic powers.

@@Iron Foundry
All of the races have recognized the need for metals in all segments of their lives. From ordinary iron to the rare and indestructable selenium, metals contribute to the construction of buildings, bridges, monuments, and other useful edifices. Some also prove to be excellent conductors of magical energy and have become indispensible in alchemical laboratories and in magical artifacts. The Iron Foundry permits the smelting and forging of all kinds of metals in huge quantities. A wondrous object like the Angelic Monument whose construction was previously considered prohibitive due to its demand for expensive metals may now be economically built.

@@Armor Plate
The protection of the individual warrior has become an important consideration in the preparation for war. Of all coverings tried to date, armor plate has proved the best in warding off the greatest variety of weapons. A combatant encased from head to toe in polished steel plate is an intimidating foe to anyone daring to challenge his might. Unforseen, ancillary benefits have arisen from the science of armor making. The barrels of bombards require the use of armor plate and, curiously, krakens prefer not to venture out of their homes until they can first cover themselves in steel plate to protect their rather sensitive skin.

@@Rod of Shivers
As magic wands go, the Rod of Shivers may be the most valuable one in existence. Those who master its use can impress the gods to part with the secret Skidbladnir spell, can provide the Shiver defense, can enchant the armor that protects the great siege engine; and perhaps, of most use, can reveal the magical field of arcane arts which just might lead to the discovery of the meaning of existence!

@@Siegecraft
The military science of Siegecraft encompasses all of the techniques developed for capturing fortified towns. It began with the straightforward but usually unsuccesful bloody direct assault and has evolved to the construction and use of sophisticated siege engines and mining techniques to overcome a walled defense. Because of the proliferation of city walls throughout Midgard, the science of Siegecraft has gained a more important role in warfare in recent years. The study of Siegecraft also has proved useful in instigating the development of other military enterprises, such as Sea Raids and Blackpowder. But of most importance, the knowledge of Siegecraft is a prime inducement toward convincing ice drakes to help you.

@@New Religion
Much wasteful energy has been expended by the gods vying for the title of chief god. Many of the more powerful ones are willing to bestow gifts and protection to those races who choose to proclaim him the greatest of all gods. This inducement is powerful enough for some to consider founding a new religion with a favorite as the supreme god. As part of the ritual, dramatic mystery plays dedicated to this personal god are often perfomed in specially built inns generally to the vast enjoyment of the populace.

@@The Niebelungenlied
This sacred book contains all of the rules for proper behavior and social interaction essential for harmonious coexistence. They were bestowed upon the inhabitants of Midgard by the gods in gratitude for their sustained devotion. On the surface, its pages relate a straightforward narrative of the gods and the coming of the various races to Midgard but, to those with the ability to see, it also explains many of the world's fundamental mysteries. The Niebelungenlied is the most influential work ever written and the ultimate authority of many religions.

@@Trade
One of the oldest and most widespread social institutions is the exchange of goods, or trade. Most ancient trade consisted of barter, where two traders would exchange goods with one another. The widespread practice of trade allowed races to exchange raw materials and goods which they had in abundance or could easily produce, for items that were rare or nonexistent in their geographic region. The introduction of regulated currency that could be exchanged for items resulted in easier, more convenient trade. Merchants soon roamed the world, connecting different lands with webs of economic interdependence. In addition to goods and profits, traders also brought back tales and technology from these foreign lands. Well-traveled traders like Brian were among the most learned sources on the cultures and traditions of foreign worlds.

@@Theurgy
There exists an important branch of the magical arts, entitled Theurgy, that enables the practitioner to summon mystical spirits to his assistance. These demi-gods inhabit all forms of nature, from the tiniest pond to the greatest mountain; and they can provide essential information in many branches of knowledge. Their advice is so valuable, in fact, that, without it, technical progress will eventually grind to a standstill. No race should ever delay too long before acquiring this critical magical knowledge. Theurgy has another important use. Whenever a race wishes to empower a Wizard's Tower, it must be able to call upon its theurgical skills to convince a magical spirt to become the tower's protecter by dwelling within its walls. A tower without a guarding spirit can never function properly.

@@Warcraft
The earliest battles were fought man-to-man with little consideration of tactics or organization. For an activity so important to the survival of a race, the lack of influence upon the outcome couldn't long be tolerated. Almost from the start, the goblins and infidels began to build standing armies of well-armed, trained soldiers, officered by individuals instructed in tactics and leadership techniques. Their immediate success as a result of these measures prompted the other races to institute similar principles of warcraft to avoid annihilation. Warcraft has now become an indispensible doctrine of all nations and races.

@@Beast Dominion
The first attempts to domesticate wild beast such as grimhorses, eagles, wolves, and elephants resulted from a desire of the more militant leaders to exploit their inherent strength or speed for military purposes. Once bred and trained to serve, these creatures quickly proved capable of heroic deeds and were soon acknowledged worthy fighters by all who had the misfortune to encounter them on the battlefield. They also have proven essential to the construction of large engineering projects.

@@Ideograms
The invention of ideograms represents a monumentally significant advance in the progress of the races toward a more civilized state. These symbols, individually or in combination, permit ideas and objects to be communicated visually and, more importantly, saved for future reference. Never again would information depend upon an untrustworthy tongue for dissemination or upon an unreliable memory for later recall. All records of a peoples' experiences would, henceforth, be available for the benefit of future generations in its original expression.

@@Hanging from Yggdrasil
The ultimate secrets of the universe can only be learned by hanging from Yggdrasil, the tree of life, that holds up all of the planes of existence in its mighty branches. The greatest minds speculate that all possible knowledge will be made known to anyone who can remain hanging long enough. Even the secret of universal peace and harmony might then be understood.

@@Ragnarok
Seers have long foretold that the reign of the gods on Asgard will end in defeat at the hands of the titans of the north in the great battle of Ragnarok. Nobody knows when this climactic battle will occur only that it is inevitabile. With its protecters now banished, Midgard and some of the other planes will return to their origninal state of ice and snow. Those races that survive this catastrophe will be doomed to a miserable struggle of survival unless they can somehow make a discovery that will take them to a better level of existence.

@@Ally with Dwarves
Dwarves are small, sturdy beings, human-like in appearance, generally of very great age, and with enormous strength for their size. They prefer to live in mines where they can satisfy their love of precious metals and gems. They are master craftsmen and are universally acknowledged to make the most magical and beautiful jewelry in existence. They are very loyal and territorial and will fight to the death to preserve their way of life. Their favorite weapon in battle is the broadaxe which they wield to devastating effect. To ally with the dwarves is to learn their secrets in metalworking and to co-opt their ability to mine and tunnel. They can be a useful ally in battle as well.

@@Dragon Lore
Dragon Lore is the starting point in any attempt to make the dragon your ally. Considering that he is the most powerful creature in existence, this is not a worthless endeavor. If you can manage to defeat a dragon, he will teach you his lore in return for his freedom.

@@Dragon Language
Before you can ally with the dragon race, you must learn to speak their language and to do so, in turn, requires knowledge of their lore and study of their life history.

@@Ally with Dragons
If you wish to summon the most powerful creatures in existence to your assistance, you first must ally with them.

@@Ally with Frost Giants
Although not as powerful as the dragon, friendly frost giants can be very useful to your success. They are redoubtable defenders and, due to their size, can move as fast as a horse. They will respond to the weirding call but in their own time. For those races in desperate straits, this can be agonizingly slow.


@IMPROVEMENT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@IMPROVEMENT_INDEX
-1,			;Nothing
0,			;Citadel
1,			;Barracks
2,			;Storehouse
3,			;Temple
4,			;Bazaar
5,			;Sage's Library
6,			;King's Court
7,			;City Walls
8,			;Aqueduct
9,			;Counting House
10,			;Monastery
11,			;Wizard's Tower
12,			;Bestiary
13,			;Arena
14,			;Forge
15,			;Artifact Guild
16,			;Fireball Shield
17,			;Bottomless Well
18,			;Staff Of Power
19,			;Alchemical Guild
20,			;Nexus
21,			;Toll House
22,			;Catacombs
23,			;Farmer's Market
24,			;Ley Lines
25,			;Alchemy Laboratory
26,			;Magic Shield
27,			;Harbor Guardian
28,			;Crystal Pyramid
29,			;Docks
30,			;Temple Of Aegir
31,			;Temporal Portal
32,			;Dungeon
33,			;Sea Fortress
34,			;Astral Portal
35,			;S.E. Structure
36,			;S.E. Engine
37,			;S.E. Armament
38,			;Base Metal to Gold
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Citadel
When populations began to organize their communities into cities, their governments became more structured and formalized. At an early stage, the ruler of the city established headquarters from which the business of running the city was conducted. In many cases, these buildings also served as the living quarters of the ruler. In wealthy cities, these facilities often expanded into immense, sprawling palaces. These richly adorned, imposing buildings were a source of civic pride, and helped to reinforce the aura of power surrounding the ruler.

@@Barracks
Warfare between the many races has been a recurring phenomenon, and this has made clear the need for the garrisoning and training of troops to defend territories. Although war is not a desirable situation, it is important that even the most peaceful of societies be prepared for the possibility of war. When warring nations are closely matched in technology and manpower, the army with the best training usually wins battles. Military schools and academies exist all over the world, established for the purpose of training military personnel in the latest methods, tactics, and technology. Men and women who graduate from such facilities possess higher than average command and military and technological skills, making them more effective in combat situations.

@@Storehouse
Early tribes of every race were nomadic, settling in specific regions only for brief periods of time. When the food supply was exhausted in one area, the nomads would move on to search for more. Cities became possible only when the development of agriculture made the supply of food more abundant and dependable. However, cities still needed a way to keep the food supply stable through the less fertile seasons. To do so, the citizens had to come up with a way to collect seasonal crops for later use. The Storehouse was designed for the accumulation and protection of surplus food. Food preservation technology (and some minor magic) meant that a smaller percentage of the population could produce and preserve enough food for everyone, allowing the remainder to pursue other jobs and activities.

@@Temple
In ancient times, almost every city had a temple dedicated to the city's patron god. Many cities also had temples dedicated to other gods, as well. Temples are not only places of worship, but can be locations harboring good or evil forces. Many races, in fact, consider the temple to be the local dwelling place for the god or goddess to whom it is dedicated. The faithful citizens bring gifts of food, rare metals, and spices to the temple as a sign of homage and respect. The presence of a temple in a city has a comforting effect on the population, and wise rulers often construct one as soon as the city begins to grow.

@@Bazaar
As cities grew and prospered, trade between the farmers, artisans, and craftsmen who lived in the vicinity contributed to the economic health of the city. It soon became apparent that the best way for conducting trade within the city was to have a central location, or bazaar, where the people offering goods and services and those seeking them could meet and conduct business. As a city's bazaar grew larger and more active, the economic vitality of the city grew as well.

@@Sage's Library
The development of writing meant that the accumulated knowledge of a society could be written down and stored rather than memorized and passed along by word of mouth. The accumulated written material was stored in the Sage's Library. The Sage's Library, because it held the city's accumulated knowledge of the mystical arts, quickly became a gathering and learning center for those interested in the practice of magic. The librarians actively collected tomes from all corners of the world, accelerating the spread of knowledge.

@@King's Court
As kingdoms and empires expanded, it became increasingly difficult for the rulers to maintain control over the more distant regions of their realm. To ensure that the far-flung cities of the empire contributed their expected share of tribute and taxes to the government, local magistrates and courts were established. In the King's Court, the ruler's representatives listened to the grievances of the people and defined and enforced the laws that governed social interaction. This helped reduced crime, and thereby kept the local population productive.

@@City Walls
Before the establishment of centralized governments capable of supporting strong, national armies, individual cities were left to fend for themselves when it came to defense. As a result, many cities constructed earthen walls and ramparts to protect against raiders and bandits. Later, stronger walls of mortared stone were built, and some were magically reinforced. City walls represented a major investment in both time and materials, requiring years to complete and constant repairs to maintain their strength and integrity. However, these walls turned the city into a fortress capable of withstanding all but the most determined attack.

@@Aqueduct
A major obstacle to population growth and expansion in early cities was the scarcity of water. In many cases, the solution to this problem was an aqueduct. Aqueducts were large, elevated stone channels through which water from nearby hills and mountains was carried into the city. Aqueducts allowed cities to grow much larger by significantly increasing the amount of available water. At the same time, by reducing the dependence on stagnant ponds and wells as water sources, aqueducts reduced the incidence of water-borne diseases. Aqueducts also allowed cities to be built in otherwise inhospitable environments, such as deserts, by providing an outside water source. A city under siege was most dependent on the aqueduct as its major source of fresh water.

@@Counting House
Counting Houses are the gathering places of the moneychangers and moneylenders. A highly developed economic system is one of the cornerstones of an advanced civilization. The individuals who work in these places lend money to persons or groups, providing capital for industrial and property development. The existence of a Counting House contributes to the economic growth of a city or region by stimulating the development of production facilities. Individual citizens can also benefit by investing their own surplus money in the Counting House and earning interest on it.

@@Monastery
Long ago, an order of monks known as the Black Robes established places of worship throughout the land. These monasteries allowed people of all races to venerate their gods and goddesses--whoever they happened to be--without prejudice. The goal of the monks was to encourage higher religious study and to discourage strife between different sects--and to thus spread joy and happiness throughout the world. In addition to its religious significance, a new monastery erected in a city often acts as a center for social and cultural activity. These establishments have always brought great pride, stability, and tradition to the citizens of their communities.

@@Wizard's Tower
A Wizard's Tower is an institution of higher learning for established practitioners of magic. Only the greatest spell-casters are invited to teach at these institutions, in hopes that they will agree to pass on some of their knowledge to the next generation. Studies at these institutions focus on the various forms of mystical power and energy and on how to apply them to positive results. Evil applications are frowned upon quite heavily. Wizard's Towers have also become centers for research into many fields, including in many cases those with little or no magical component--like medicine and physics.

@@Bestiary
As cities became larger, it was clearly necessary to control the amount of pollution and congestion caused by the great number of animals needed to run the city. Beasts of burden supplied food and labor, and the beasts of war worked for the defense of the city. With the invention of the Bestiary, city governments were finally able to centralize control, grooming, care, and maintenance of these animals and thereby reduce the less pleasant aspects of keeping a large animal population inside a city. A key element in this success was that the city's wizards were able to create and supply special feed grains to reduce the amount of flatulence experienced by the various beasts.

@@Arena
Arenas provided entertainment for the people of a city. Presenting them with spectacles and events gave citizens a temporary escape from their often harsh day-to-day life. People would gather to watch mock wizards' duels, thrilling chariot races, and gladiatorial fights. The fame earned by many of the successful gladiators and the money to be made by the food vendors allowed to operate outside the Arena were incentive enough to cause many cities to build their own Arenas for their people.

@@Forge
The Forge is more than the simple smithy from which it takes its name. Rather, it is an area in the heart of the city dedicated to the needs of the local craftspeople, where they can gather and work cooperatively to produce goods for sale and trade. Of course, the smiths are often a strong voice in the Forge community, and the specialization of labor grew from their work patterns. This specialization allowed the members of a Forge to increase the speed and efficiency of their manufacturing processes, to far surpass earlier methods of production. The development of the Forge system played a key role both in increasing the productivity of cities and providing a nurturing environment for artisans of every type.

@@Artifact Guild
Odd as it seems, an Artifact Guild is more akin to an industrial center than to a center for magical studies. On these small campuses, minor thaumaturges, well trained in the spells specific to their tasks, use artifacts created by greater magicians to speed the production of whatever the city demands. This "guild" recruits from among the most talented craftsmen of the area those born with the potential for magical skill, then trains and equips them for their new labors. Though they are considered only lower-class users of magic, these craftsmen enjoy high status in the community.

@@Fireball Shield
One of the most destructive weapons a city can face is the Fireball. This villainous construction of advanced magic can destroy hundreds of people with a single blast. It takes the efforts of multiple great wizards, working together (no small feat) to develop and erect a defense to counteract this brutal weapon's power. What generally works is a subtle method of cloaking the city in a magical field that renders it invisible to the magical targeting that leads the Fireball to its destination. When cast correctly, this shield also quenches on contact any Fireball that does manage to find and reach the city. This secondary defense protects the population and prevents them from being harmed by both the blast and any fallout of burning residue from the Fireball.

@@Bottomless Well
Continual growth in a city's population leads to an inevitable increase in the amount of garbage generated. Eventually, the existing landfills and garbage dumps are filled, which forces the local users of magic to divert some of their resources to getting rid of the trash. This leads to the gradual but steady destruction of the local environment and stores of magical energies. To reverse this problem, a city can have its wizards create a Bottomless Well. Garbage is thrown into this endless void and goes into one of the dimensions reachable only through magical means. We hope that some of the trash is used or consumed by the inhabitants there. If not, perhaps they can send it somewhere else.

@@Staff Of Power
Many of the arts carried on in the local Forge require some amount of magical power to keep them running efficiently. Rather than draining the city's wizards to supply the Forge with power, many urban centers rely on a self-sustaining Staff of Power. Once created (by a group of magical adepts), a Staff of Power supplies the workshops in the Forge with all the energy they need. Unfortunately, the convenience of a Power Staff comes at a rather significant cost to the local magical environment.

@@Alchemical Guild
One alternative to using a Staff of Power to provide magic energies for a Forge is the establishment of an Alchemical Guild. This organization gathers the expertise of the local alchemists and puts them to work generating energy through manipulation of the local aether. Aethereal energies are safer than the usual sorts of magical power, and their use causes less damage to the local magical environment. However, the Alchemical Guild generates its own environmental dangers. The potential for disruption of the aether's normal flow and the resulting backlash when the aethereal knot breaks and the build-up of pressure is released can damage the land around the city.

@@Nexus
When properly aligned and coordinated by a powerful purification ritual, the energy of several ley lines can be physically overlapped and tapped by skilled sorcerers. The mighty magical torrent thus caused is what the magicians call a Nexus. A Nexus generates extraordinary amounts of magical energy, more than enough to feed the needs of even a large city. The danger is that a Nexus is by its nature highly unstable. The necessarily precise coordination of the different ley lines is difficult to sustain, and if it is not, the Nexus becomes a volatile cauldron of mystical forces. A Nexus can erupt if the purity is not properly maintained, causing immense damage to the city it serves.

@@Toll House
To generate income, cities near well-trafficked trade routes often establish a Toll House to extract road taxes from travellers. Though some traders detour to avoid such tolls, it is worth the price to most to avoid the added trip time caused by a detour, and they simply grumble and pay. Most of the income from this establishment goes to the city, but some is diverted into maintaining the road on which the tolls are collected. In this way, the local ruler gains a reputation as one who gives a valuable service in return for the fees collected.

@@Catacombs
One of the natural products of any large urban center is a vast amount of waste. As a city continues to grow, steps must be taken to move sewage away from inhabited areas, so that it does not become a health hazard. Catacombs are, among other things, stone sewers that help to move waste beneath and out of a city and into nearby rivers and other waterways, which eventually wash it into the ocean. Catacombs are also a convenient place to place the corpses of the city's dead, so that those who wish to can visit them whenever they choose (though the trip is rather unpleasant). Over the years, the underground tunnels and passages become so filled that the walls often seem to be built from the remains of the departed.

@@Farmer's Market
A Farmer's Market is a large, permanent bazaar where representatives of local farms come regularly to sell their perishable goods. The permanency and expansiveness of the Farmer's Market allows a wide variety of food items and household goods to be available to the general public. With improved storage techniques, a Farmer's Market can stock and sell perishable foods in large quantities, thus reducing the price to the consumer. The combination of ready availability and low prices make the Farmer's Market a great boon to agriculture.

@@Ley Lines
Though they are quite similar to the ley lines that traverse the distances between cities, the lines that weave in and among the buildings in a city are streams of magical force rather than great rivers. The local wizards can create a networks of such small lines, in effect making an advanced road system. An infrastructure like this is one of the legs on which a huge market economy can be based. Goods move within the city almost without transport costs, carried along by the mystical current. Ley Lines also make minor magicks (the kind practiced by most itinerant craftspeople) easier, and reduce the amount of waste material generated by such endeavors.

@@Alchemy Laboratory
Historically, Sage Libraries and Wizard's Towers have acted as the primary centers of research for new ideas, spells, and technologies. In recent years, the growth of private industry has given birth to hundreds of small, privately owned research facilities. These secretive Alchemy Laboratories, usually dedicated to research in a single specialty, have made tremendous advances in many fields of both magic and technology. When a city builds its own Alchemy Laboratory, it can often recruit the best of the private alchemists, thus vastly increasing the speed at which new advances are discovered.

@@Magic Shield
City walls have defended cities against ground attack, making each walled city a bastion of protection for its populace. However, no matter how strong or how high these walls are, the cities were still easy prey to any attack from above. An airborne attacker could easily bypass any fortifications, leaving these heavily enforced cities virtually defenseless. Wizards have now developed a Magic Shield that covers the city like a giant bubble, providing protection from aerial assault. This shield aids the city defenders against all flying creatures, and even against aerial missiles and spells--like thunderbolts.

@@Harbor Guardian
The construction of defensive structures such as city walls and fortified castles dates back to ancient times. City walls were designed primarily to repel an attack launched by ground-based forces, and they performed adequately in such a situation. However, coastal cities are also vulnerable to attack from sea bombardments, since even a city wall leaves seaports relatively unprotected. The best way to protect the port has always been to keep the enemy out of range of the city. This is accomplished by conjuring a Harbor Guardian to patrol the approach to the city. These colossal metal giants live at the mouth of the city's harbor or on barrier islands near the city. The guardian holds enemy vessels at bay, turning away or thinning out the attacking force and minimizing damage to the city's port.

@@Crystal Pyramid
One of the greatest natural sources of magical power available is the primary energy of the universe itself. A giant crystal pyramid, truly aligned with the proper celestial bodies and ensorcelled by the most skillful wizards, makes it possible to tap into this cosmic power. Celestial energy is collected in specially designed internal chambers, then converted into usable energy by transubstantiation mechanisms in the pyramid's base. Celestial energy is a clean and completely safe form of magical power, but this system of collecting it is difficult and often prohibitively expensive to construct.

@@Docks
Just because a city is built in a coastal region does not guarantee that it is readily accessible by ship. In order for a port to establish a steady trade, fishing, or other shipping industry, the city must have a harbor. A harbor is a protected body of water that shelters ships from waves and high winds. Although some coastal cities are established in areas where a natural harbor exists, most seaports are forced either to improve the existing natural harbor or to build a man-made harbor to shelter ships and provide channels deep enough to accommodate large vessels.

@@Temple Of Aegir
Many cities have been successful in increasing the number of precious stones and other riches gathered from the sea by constructing a temple to the goddess Aegir. This one of many sea goddesses sometimes rewards her worshipers by leading them to the treasures of the ocean floors. It is said that she also causes precious jewels and metals to wash up on the nearby shores to be scavenged by her grateful followers. Aegir has been known to calm and warm the seas for ships near the town, to help promote sea commerce.

@@Temporal Portal
The warp spell allows a sufficiently skilled group of conjurors to create a displacement in the physical structure of our plane of existence. When this spell is cast and inside the mysterious building the magicians call a Temporal Portal, it is possible to send military units through the displacement, to be received inside a Temporal Portal in some other city--but only on the same plane. Needless to say, this development has revolutionized certain types of travel, and is a great boon to the movement of troops, diplomatic missions, and creatures.

@@Dungeon
In order to maintain tranquility in a city while the troops that normally keep the peace are out defending the realm, it has been necessary to jail offenders and political dissidents. Dungeons hold those unwilling to follow the law of the land, so that they can serve as an example to others. In this way, the mere presence of a dungeon in a city helps to uphold the laws and control civil unrest. In the absence of a strong, visible military force policing the city, the dungeon reinforces the will of the ruler.

@@Sea Fortress
Seagoing vessels have been used for both commercial transport and military purposes for thousands of years. Cities built on rivers and on the coasts of seas and oceans built facilities to receive cargo and to house military vessels stationed in the area. Many of the larger cities built massive Sea Fortresses that included shipyards for the construction of new vessels, large warehouse and docking facilities, and dry-docks for the repair of damaged vessels. Heavily damaged ships can be repaired much more quickly when such facilities are available.

@@Astral Portal
An Astral Portal works much like a Temporal Portal, with the exception that the spell activated in this gate is capable of transporting troops and creatures to cities on different planes. The components of the two incantations are quite different, however, and the wisest of the conjurors tell us that under no circumstances should both spells be performed in the same building. Thus, a city might need to have both a Temporal and an Astral Portal serving it, to different ends.

@@Siege Engine Structure
The structural parts of a siege engine are the frame to which all other parts of the siege engine are attached. All siege engine Armaments and Engines must be connected to a structural section in order to function. Armaments and Engines not connected to the frame are outlined in red on the siege engine display, and do not work until connected.

@@Siege Engine Engine
Engine components provide the motive power for the siege machine. There are two types: boilers and fuel. Boilers provide the physical power that moves the siege engine forward. (The use of magical power might alert the target to its approach.) Each fuel supply provides enough flammable material to fire one boiler for the duration of the trip. Thus, every boiler requires fuel in order to function. At minimum, a siege engine requires one of each, and the more working boilers the engine possesses, the faster it will arrive at its destination.

@@Siege Engine Armament
Armaments are the effective components of a siege engine. There are three types: mechanical, weapon, and mobility. Each weapon module provides for a more powerful attack when the siege engine reaches its intended target. For each weapon, a mechanical module is needed to fire the missile. Both the weapon and the mechanical module require a mobility mounting in order to be aimed and fired. At minimum, every siege engine requires one of each type of module in order to be successful in its mission.

@@Base Metal to Gold
Raising and funding a large empire can cost a huge amount of money. The taxes required to maintain such an enterprise would cause havoc in even the most docile population. In order to alleviate this particular problem, rulers turn to their alchemists. With the proper amount of research and some preliminary funding, a team of alchemical experts can succeed in turning base metals (lead and such) into gold. Note that this is an ongoing project which requires all the productivity of an entire city--but turns all that productivity into glittering aureum!


@WONDER_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@WONDER_INDEX
0,			;Golden Orchard
1,			;Cauldron Of Plenty
2,			;Sacred Menhir
3,			;Eye Of Ran
4,			;Wizard's Conclave
5,			;Merlin's Oracle
6,			;Excalibur
7,			;Round Table
8,			;Holy Quest
9,			;The Crown's Emissary
10,			;Altar Of Enlightenment
11,			;Stonehenge
12,			;Brian's Expedition
13,			;Royal Joust
14,			;Sacred Rune Of Alteration
15,			;Bard's Tavern
16,			;Tome Of Inspiration
17,			;Pearl Obelisk
18,			;Philosopher's Stone
19,			;Orb Of Peace
20,			;Angelic Monument
21,			;Glyph Of Understanding
22,			;Circle Of Summoning
23,			;Pandora's Box
24,			;Council Of The Overmind
25,			;Deus Ex Machina
26,			;Eye Of Odin
27,			;Sangreal
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Golden Orchard
The Golden Orchard is a magical double row of fruit trees, grafted from the orchard of the gods themselves. The name of the individual who stole cuttings from the gods' trees is shrouded in mystery (to preserve him or her from punishment), but the effect is well known. Planted and tended by powerful magicians, the cuttings grow into a orchard in which every tree is always bearing. In the coldest month, one can pick tropical fruit. The harvest from the Golden Orchard is so bountiful that the city where it thrives has little need to store or preserve food for the winter.

@@Cauldron Of Plenty
The Cauldron of Plenty is a very ornate and highly crafted magical alembic that was originally used by the old gods to celebrate times of great joy and celebration. The story of how it fell to earth to be buried in an unknown location is a long and tangled tale of intrigue and deception, much too long to relate here. It is said that there are clues to its location spread about the land, and any who undertake to find and retrieve the cauldron need be patient and diligent, and their reward will be well worth the trials.

@@Sacred Menhir
This gigantic stone, standing over 100 feet high, is carved with all the laws necessary for a perfect system economics and commerce. It was erected by two warring gods as a futile effort at reconciling an age-old disagreement. Unfortunately, each god used his magic to both write his own opinion and translate the other's writings into undecipherable script. Thus, the feud continued. Merchants from around the world come to copy down the great laws, in hopes that they might finally translate them and apply them to their businesses. It is said that with the laws, one would become a success and obtain wealth and riches. Partial translations, created magically, have resulted in great gains, but the text also contains warnings against greed.

@@Eye Of Ran
The original Eye of Ran was a watchtower and lighthouse built around the power of a magical crystal eye on a tiny island in the harbor of Immerman. Estimated to have been 300 feet high, the primary function of the Eye of Ran was to give guidance to the navigating wizards on approaching ships, for the coast near Immerman was otherwise unmarked. The tower itself was a temple to the god Ran, who is said to watch over vessels plying the seas. The one true Eye of Ran, said to have been the actual oculus of the one-eyed god, has been lost for centuries, but modern wizards claim that a determined effort could find or recreate the Eye.

@@Wizard's Conclave
The Wizard's Conclave serves many purposes, but perhaps the most vital is its presence as a library and repository of magical knowledge and books. The librarians of the Conclave gather every work possible (those they can pry from the owner's hands) on magic and the mystical arts. They believe that their task not only helps preserve and document magicians' work for future generations, but also helps stimulate new ideas and inventions. One of the unique things about the Wizard's Conclave is that it is one of the few institutions of study that is blind to race--the librarians gather knowledge from all lands without bias.

@@Merlin's Oracle
In the days of legend, the greatest prophet and seer was a powerful wizard who called himself Merlin. It is said that Merlin gained his powers of second sight from an ancient elder dragon he bested in duel of riddles--no easy feat. Merlin's abilities as a prophet and spell-caster became so well known that nobles would travel from across the world to seek his counsel. Even other seers consulted him before making important predictions. The oracle built in his name collects all of the known relics of Merlin's life. Through high level magic, this library of Merlinaria seeks to bring the benefits of Merlin's wisdom to an entire realm.

@@Excalibur
Created in the time when the world was new...forged from a glowing star that fell from the heavens...tempered by an ancient, now extinct race of sorcerers...the sword is Excalibur, and its like has never been seen before or since. The blade is said to be sharp enough to cleave an anvil or a dragon's scales. Legend tells that this sword gives its wielder almost supernatural fighting prowess--and hardens the skin to the toughness of plate-armor. As its legend spread, Excalibur became the most feared, loved, and sought-after sword in the world. It is perhaps the one symbol of power that can bring all the races to unity, and prosperity to the realm that holds it. Ownership of this sword provides a magical protection to all friendly cities equivalent in strength to a city wall.

@@Round Table
The Round Table is a gathering of the best military minds of the land. Here, the greater knights of the realm gather to share tactics with one another and teach their arts of warfare to promising officers, who afterward spread their knowledge throughout the ranks. In this way, the knights maximize their influence on the soldiers of the nation and create the best trained forces possible in the shortest amount of time.

@@Holy Quest
The Holy Quest is the collective name for a series of military expeditions mounted with the intention of recapturing sacred lands from the control of a group of rogue goblins. The most successful was the Third Quest, in which a tremendous force led by the human mercenaries Ernest Publius and Bertram Augustus managed to seize a number of coastal cities and temporarily hold a human kingdom in the Goblinate Lands. In addition to the stated religious goals, the Holy Quest also served to extend the political power of several ambitious nobles over large areas of the world. This great burst of territorial expansion led to an increase in both the population and the productivity of their tribes, and the ongoing wars provided lucrative business for traders and merchants.

@@The Crown's Emissary
All wise rulers recognize the importance of diplomatic relations with other realms, but the king who instituted the messenger corps known as The Crown's Emissary was even more foresighted than most. These dedicated riders travel the world delivering missives from and to nobles of every race. Thus, they serve the overall purpose of supplying communications to the world, while also collecting mounds of tactically useful information for their one true leige.

@@Altar Of Enlightenment
The power of the mind and soul are strong, and all races' need for an understanding of purpose in life is great. The High Clerics of Mount Glyndale built this magnificent altar for worship and enlightenment so that all the folk of the land could commune with the divine and seek wisdom. Travelers from across the world of Midgard make their way here to supplicate for any word from the messengers of the gods. Content and inspired, these citizens and leaders return home to spread the news of fulfillment and good auspice. In this way, the altar helps to promote peace of mind throughout the land.

@@Stonehenge
To a casual observer, the stars might seem fixed and immutable, but any student of astronomy knows that they move. With the aid of many strategically placed standing stones and sighting posts, sages have managed to chart the courses of the sun, the moon, and the important stars throughout their cycles. The establishment of the magnificent Henge of Stones--a great system of standing stones, plane stones, holes for sighting posts, viewing pits, and reference points--was a major leap forward in the study of the heavens and their influences on Midgard. Sages travel from the four corners of the world to do research there, and they share their results with the mages of the land where the Stone Henge stands.

@@Brian's Expedition
Many are the tales of the great explorer Brian, but perhaps the most stirring is the true story of his great seagoing expedition to chart the currents and continents of the entire world of Midgard. Though Brian was not successful in completing his "Mappe of the Worlde Entire" before his untimely demise, the knowledge of the open ocean, its winds and currents, and the lands to be found out there provided a great boon to mariners of every stripe. Ships travel farther, faster, and with greater confidence, now that Brian's logs are on every captain's shelf.

@@Royal Joust
The Royal Joust began as a private tournament for the entertainment of the nobility. It was soon opened to all citizens as a peaceful means of filling their leisure time, which had come to be pervaded by brawls and general restlessness. The rowdiness soon turned to excitement at sharing in the tragedies and triumphs of the local heroes. In time, the joust drew the best warriors from cities across the realm, and these annual events brought the citizens together as one community, if only for a short time.

@@Sacred Rune Of Alteration
Once a coin used by the deceptive god Loki to create pranks and other vicious jokes, the Sacred Rune of Alteration now rests in the hands of mortals. Guarded and prayed to as a holy relic for centuries by a small tribe of changelings, the Rune was stolen by a expert thief over a hundred years ago, and both were believed lost forever. The Rune is reputed to have the power to transform any material into whatever the user wishes. From simple tasks like changing the color of an apple or mending clothes to something as drastic as changing the nature and abilities of a creature, there is no limit to its power.

@@Bard's Tavern
Everyone gets tired and thirsty at times, especially the entertainers who spend their days wandering the realm telling tales of heroes, singing songs of brave deeds done and treachery sown. Hence the Bard's Tavern, a wondrous place inside which there is always a song in the air, a smile on the face, a soft bed to lay your head on, and a cold ale to soothe your throat. This is a place where minstrels, artists, and all folk can come to share stories, exchange ideas, and relax. Were it not for the Bard's Tavern, many songs from foreign places and deeds of heroes and villains alike might be lost forever, forgotten on the long roads that the storytellers, singers, and artists travel. However, in the Bard's Tavern all those stories, songs, and ideas can be passed on and, therefore, preserved.

@@Tome Of Inspiration
As anyone who has seen it can easily guess, this is not simply a large book filled with fascinating facts. The Tome of Inspiration is the life's work of dozens of sorcerous sages. This mysterious object is both a book--fragile as any parchment--and the repository of a miraculous overlapping of spells woven through the pages, the binding, and even the words scribed on every sheet. No two readers find the same text, and all come away from a session enlightened and energized with the seeds of bold new ideas.

@@Pearl Obelisk
Upkeep costs are a burden. It takes workers to keep things running smoothly, and workers require payment for their time and efforts. Most of what these folk do is trivial--oiling moving parts, cleaning floors, repairing small leaks, and so on--and could easily be taken care of by simple spells. Unfortunately, the spells are generally more costly than the people. The Pearl Obelisk circumvents this problem by collecting all the tiny maintenance spells (and their costs) into one big conjuring. Erected in one city of an empire, it performs all the minor services required by simple city improvements--and with no moving parts of its own.

@@Philosopher's Stone
In ancient days, a secretive ashram of monks and alchemists gathered knowledge from the astral planes and used the power they thus gained to create magnificent artifacts. One of the most useful and powerful of these was the legendary Philosopher's Stone. Formed into solidity from ethereal material, the Stone was originally intended to be a simple battery for magic, but the ashram found that they had somehow gathered an existing artifact from a world unknown, crafted with the foresight of beings far beyond our capabilities of thinking. This relic was placed for safekeeping in the temple of Ossuron, which later disappeared into a mystical vortex. Whoever should succeed in restoring the Stone to Midgard will find that it reaches out to inventive minds and inspires new ways of thinking.

@@Orb Of Peace
This magical bauble is a tyrant's dream come true. When the murderous despot Hamelu was overthrown and imprisoned by his own subjects, a group of nefarious conjurors and alchemists engineered his escape. These magicians did not intend to free the tyrant, however. Using his severed hands--turned to Troll's Gold by the alchemists--as a base, they constructed the artifact now known as the Orb of Peace. This strangely compelling relic prevents citizens from expressing any interest in political events outside of their own city, thus leaving their ruler an unfettered hand in tampering with the government of the realm.

@@Angelic Monument
Beauty, it is said, is in the eye of the beholder. The Angelic Monument is the only known refutation of that maxim. All races, all species, and even the Stygians and the beasts of the field find pleasure in gazing on this fine statue. The design is pleasing enough, but it is the magic inherent in the stone that makes this work of art truly magnificent. Whatever the cause, the effect is startling. No one fights in sight of the monument, and anyone who has once visited it wishes to return.

@@Glyph Of Understanding
No matter how benevolent the ruler of a kingdom might be, there are always those who are not satisfied. Troublemakers are especially influential with the populace, it seems, when some of the young men from the city are in military companies stationed elsewhere. There are ways to combat this problem on a city by city basis, of course, but the wise leader prefers a single solution to multiple difficulties. The Glyph of Understanding is just that. Though it does not make the common folk more intelligent, this powerful magical artifact causes them, quite simply, to comprehend the need for defense of the borderlands. When they know that leaving borders unmanned means eventually fighting in the streets of their home town, most reasonable folk concede that having junior away from home for a few years isn't such a high price to pay for peace.

@@Circle Of Summoning
Though the Alchemical Guilds supply large amounts of materials for crops, magic, armor, and weapons, their abilities are limited. Each can generate enough power and goods for a small town, perhaps enough for a city, but sweat and industry can only do so much. The Circle of Summoning, however, provides a nearly unlimited supply of materials and energy. This great magic allows the local wizards to conjure a vast array of exotic beasts of burden from unknown realms. These summoned creatures have little will of their own--the Circle cannot summon intelligent beings--and can be found doing all manner of jobs, from pulling plows to driving water pumps to working the bellows for blacksmiths making armor and weapons.

@@Pandora's Box
In legend, Pandora was the first woman. Created by the god Hephaestus, she was blessed with all the graces in the world. Pandora moved as though made from water--voice so sweet it could calm a raging storm, skin as soft and precious as silk--her hair flowed with the wind as if they were one. Pandora had but one duty, preserving a box which she was never to open. Many seasons passed and she avoided the temptation to open the box, but of course (this is a legend, after all), she eventually gave in. Out poured all the evils of the world, which until that time had been confined, and they swept across the innocent new world to forever mar its perfection. Pandora was filled with sorrow at what she had done, but there was no undoing it.

@@Council Of The Overmind
The original Council of the Overmind formed near the end of the War of Ages. The Elves and Dwarves had been at each other's throats for over two centuries, and both races were severely weakened. The Goblins and Stygians, sensing an opportunity, allied in an attempt to destroy both. Fearing the dark races more than each other, the greatest wizards of the Elves and Dwarves met in council, and together with Human and Buteo conjurors, they sought to bring the peace of the enigmatic Overmind to Midgard. Their success ended the war, sent the dark races back underground, and flooded the world with the pacifist wisdom of the Overmind. Unfortunately, the Dwarves had taken so much damage that they chose to retreat from contact with the surface. They dug themselves in deeper and sealed all of their old digs, and they are rarely if ever seen today.

@@Deus Ex Machina
When the great evil stretches its hand across the land, blacking the light and crushing hope, many mortals become lost in despair. Even the foremost scholars have difficulty imagining there is any way to stop the force of this evil. All seems lost. It is said that in these times, the gods of light fear that mortals might be lost forever, and the gods decide to intervene. They choose one to become the greatest engineer of the generation, and they plant the seeds of knowledge in the Great Engineer's mind. What form the design for the evil-crushing construction takes cannot be foreseen, but with the gods' inspiration, it is sure to work. The gods do not give guarantees, however. The question left unanswered is whether the mortals will choose to build it--and whether they'll get the job finished in time.

@@Eye Of Odin
Most wizards, sages, and scholars contemplate the universe from inside their precious alchemy laboratories. Nestled in their places of power, where they have gathered their tomes of magic, many of these folk of higher thinking fall prey to the belief that nothing could match the wonders and knowledge held in these fortresses. Any security that belief brought was shattered when the Eye of Odin was found and carried back to the kingdom. Its essence reached out to all the minds in the empire, raising the overall consciousness of the people. Even the wisest in the realm benefited from this powerful relic.

@@Sangreal
The word has been used to describe many things, but there is only one true Sangreal. "San-" means sacred, of course, and "-greal" is taken from one of the old languages; the old word means "cup" or "platter" and is also applied to bowls. The Sangreal is a legendary drinking bowl sought after by knights and paladins for centuries. Mere ownership of this remarkable bit of tableware is enough to inspire confidence in troops, citizens, and the population of entire nations. A leader willing to pay for the search for the Sangreal would be well rewarded--if the search met with success.


@UNIT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@UNIT_INDEX
0,			;Settler
1,			;Dwarf
2,			;H. Warrior
3,			;Merman
4,			;Hawkman
5,			;Elf Warrior
6,			;Infidel
7,			;Goblin
8,			;Troll
9,			;Elf Archer
61,			;Warlock
11,			;Housecarl
12,			;Merguard
13,			;Eagleman
14,			;Berserker
15,			;Golden Horde
16,			;Elf Rider
17,			;Night Rider
18,			;Ranger
19,			;I. Horseman
20,			;Giant Otterine
21,			;Crag Wolf
22,			;Ice Drake
23,			;Treefolk
24,			;Catapult
25,			;Siege Engine
26,			;Bombard
27,			;Great Bats
28,			;Witch
29,			;Great Wizard
30,			;Ellida
31,			;Skidbladnir
32,			;Longboat
33,			;Dragon Boat
34,			;Old Man
35,			;Shield Boat
36,			;Unsp. Horror
37,			;Paladin
38,			;Changeling
39,			;Mtn. Giant
40,			;Ogre
41,			;Great Eagle
42,			;Fell Wraith
43,			;Tree Guard
44,			;Thunderbolt
45,			;Fireball
46,			;Skald
47,			;Fairy
48,			;Caravan
49,			;Triton Legion
50,			;Jack O'Lantern
51,			;Skeleton
52,			;Barrow Wight
53,			;Porpoise Pod
54,			;Lich
55,			;Baba Yaga
56,			;Frost Giant
57,			;Giant Spider
58,			;Kraken
59,			;Ancient Dragon
60,			;Jrmngnd Spit
10,			;Sorcerer
62,			;Human Hero
63,			;Great Goblin
64,			;Merfolk Hero
65,			;Infidel Hero
66,			;Buteo Hero
67,			;Elf Hero
68,			;Stygian Lord
69,			;M. Settler
70,			;Buteo Settler
71,			;Goblin Miner
72,			;Elf Settler
73,			;Sty. Settler
74,			;War Elephant
75,			;Giant Flytrap
-1,			;Flag unit
76,			;Dragon
77,			;Griffin
78,			;Worm
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Settler
When cities grew to a size where the resources were insufficient to adequately insure a decent standard of living for the populace, adventurous groups of citizens set out on their own in search of a place to build a new city. Once a suitable site was found, the settlers would build their new homes, and develop the land surrounding the city. Eventually, the whole process repeated, and the new city would send out settlers of its own. This process allowed civilizations to grow throughout history, from the empires of the ancient world to those of today.

@@Dwarf
This thick bearded, gruff race are well known for their superior ability in penetrating bedrock. Masters with the pick-axe and hammer, they tear through the earth like a sharp sword through flesh. It is almost as if they speak with the earth and know exactly where to strike. No one can recruit or raise Dwarves, they can only be found and, sometimes, employed to a cause. Once hired, however, a Dwarf stays on to complete his service no matter how often he is asked (or told) to leave. They are a stubborn race, and too fond of drink, as well.

@@Human Warrior
The backbone of all human armies, these fighters are the potential saviors of mankind. Willing to lay their lives on the line to protect their friends and families, Human Warriors represent all that the humans consider just and right. Trained from youth to protect the realms of man, these warriors are put through the hardest training humans can withstand--rigorous weapon classes, study of other races' weaknesses and powers, and real battles with captured creatures--and constantly reminded that fear is not an option. Not every recruit makes it, but those that do are the stronger for being survivors. Each has no need to fear, knowing that his back is protected by a brother in arms with equal skills and bravery.

@@Merman
The race of Merfolk are of the same family as humans, but they long ago returned from the land to the sea--developing gills and retaining their lungs. The Merman is a simple infantry unit, with little military training. These recruits can reach the surface directly by way of the shoreline, which gives them something of an advantage over most land races. The Merman can launch a surprise attack on a surface civilization, then quickly retreat back into the sea when necessary.

@@Hawkman
The Hawkmen are the backbone of the Buteo armies, serving as guards, scouts, and as offensive forces if needed. Though they're not highly trained soldiers, Hawkmen are always ready for duty and happy to serve the Buteo empire. Schooled in rudimentary combat and tactics, these citizen-soldiers have shown that they are often a match for the ground dwelling races, and are quite glad to talk, sing, and write about their superiority over them. The Merfolk, however, are a mystery to the Buteo race, as are the Buteo people to the Merfolk. Hence, these two races have never formally met on the fields of battle.

@@Elf Warrior
Any army from an Elven land consists primarily of Elf Warriors. These troops see more combat than most of the Elf military units. This is partially due to the fact that these groups are inexpensive to create, and their natural Elf abilities allow even untrained recruits to do a fair job of defending a city--though not against advanced military units. Most Elf warriors are part-time soldiers; they have families and jobs back home. After all, the pay isn't great in the infantry, and they're not skilled enough to reach higher military rank.

@@Infidel
The Infidels are a warlike race who originally lived in tent communities on the outskirts of other civilized nations. These warriors took joy in conquest, and preferred to invade the cities of others, rather than building their own. Despite becoming a settled nation, they are still quite aggressive and difficult to befriend. Even as allies they are not often loyal for long; it is more to their nature to conquer and steal than to build and trade. Do not underestimate the Infidels' cunning--guard your cities closely if they are near.

@@Goblin
Goblins are well aware that they are not the most powerful creatures in the realm, so they rely on their numbers to overwhelm opponents. Stout little warriors, Goblins are cheap to hire and easy to train. Goblin generals are normally four feet tall and 180 pounds or more, and are considered to be quite a catch for goblin women. General Bogaa was the most famous Goblin general (at least so far in goblin history). Fully five feet tall and weighing in at 312 pounds, Bogaa received the rank of General as soon as the Goblin Kings saw him in training.

@@Troll
Trolls are very distant cousins of Goblins, but they still share a strong family bond. Being larger and stronger than Goblins, Trolls often serve as valuable shock troops for the Goblin armies. Under the right conditions and leadership, Trolls have been known to become fanatical followers of their smaller cousins, lending a strong arm when needed and asking for nothing in return but a land to call their home. The Goblins have never understood the admiration that their Troll cousins have for them, but are more than glad to take full advantage of this fact, and almost every Goblin city has at least one troop of Trolls within its walls.

@@Elf Archer
The archers of the elven race are highly regarded for their talent with the bow. Only the strongest and those most dedicated in their training are granted the high status of Bowmaster by the Elves and become what we know as the Elf Archer. A wise king would gladly hire on elven bowmen before any other archers who volunteered to serve and protect a kingdom. Their aim is so astoundingly accurate that rumors aplenty hint that their skills must be magical in nature. 

@@Sorcerer
A Sorcerer has power unrivaled by most living creatures, excepting perhaps dragons and their kin. Able to enchant items, most Sorcerers carry with them a cloak that allows them to pass through, over, and around all terrain. This cloak also allows the Sorcerer to see far beyond the range normal for mortals. The sky, the earth, and even the depths of the oceans can hold no secrets from a true Sorcerer, but these cloaks are not infallible, and they require incredible amounts of magical energy. The Sorcerer must always be careful to return to the safety of a city or an elevated platform, for all too often the power that they gain from their enchanted cloaks goes to their heads, and many powerful Sorcerers have been lost to a fall from the skies.

@@Housecarl
Humans who show themselves to be far above even the high standards Human Warriors are held to get special training. Whether because of their strength, speed, agility, or intelligence, these troops are hand picked by the human military leaders to become Housecarls, an elite fighting force known for their determination and resilience in battle. It has been often been proved that a Housecarl is willing and ready to give his life to allow others to escape or to hold an enemy at bay until reinforcements can arrive. The greatest honor for a Housecarl is to be granted the opportunity to join the King's Guard, a super-elite force made up of only the finest Housecarls.

@@Merguard
The Merguard comprise the elite formations of the Merfolk military. Most serve as the front line of defense and combat, while a few remain in camp to train new Merman and Merguard recruits. Like all Merfolk, the Merguard have retained both gills and lungs and can to journey both under the seas and on the surface of Midgard. Of course, this is no help in gaining access to the clouds, and the Merfolk hire flyers from outside their race when the need arises.

@@Eagleman
Just as the Hawkmen serve as the main battle force for the Buteo armies, the Eaglemen serve as their elite shock troops. Eaglemen are fully trained in combat and tactics, and they take great pride in their training, for to be a Buteo elite puts you above others, even if their power or numbers are greater. Eaglemen are known for one particular tactic above all others, for it has been the downfall of many cities. The Buteo leaders will send out scouts to find a target that they desire. Once it's found, troops of Hawkmen backed by flocks of their mighty brethren the Eaglemen swoop down from the skies, ripping into their opponents with blinding speed. Only the mightiest and most well defended cities can withstand this sort of attack; most fall within hours.

@@Berserker
Berserkers fight for the sheer love of battle. In combat, it is as if a berserker's spirit leaves his body, and all that is visible in his eyes is madness. The unfailing berserk energy does not allow him to stop fighting until everything in sight is dead. He feels neither fear nor weakness, and the berserker's battle cry is known and dreaded throughout the land. Though a berserker might wear the color of your army, be aware that his only true color is blood red.

@@Golden Horde
The name of the Golden Horde is often invoked to frighten unruly children into better behavior. It is the most feared group of cavalry in the known world, and it serves as the backbone of the Infidel armies. This elite force has never met its equal, and these extraordinarily skilled riders have no reason to expect they ever will. Like thunderous clouds blanketing the sky, the noise of their steeds engulfs the land in a storm of hooves and metal, then the Horde lays waste to everything in its path. Do not travel into the wild lands without scouts and full knowledge that it is their playground you are intruding on.

@@Elf Rider
The Elf Riders are among the greatest scouts in any army--in any region of Midgard.  They are not only the fastest moving--seeming to know even unfamiliar land as well as their home fields--but Elf Riders are also trained alongside the Elf Archers. Mastery of the art of bowmanship on horseback was unknown until the legendary Goblin War. When the goblin armies brought their Crag Wolves into play at Sunset Cleft, the tide of war turned.  Prince Sylvestri saw the need for archers who could keep somehow pace with these wolves. He took it upon himself to train an elite cadre of riding archers, and when they first took the field at the Battle of Donegan's Pit, the Elf Riders proved to be the advantage that the Elf forces needed to drive the goblins back to their own lands.

@@Night Rider
Night Riders are the base cavalry of the undead, raised from the ground to serve the masters of darkness. The dark riders are killing machines, skeletal nightmares riding steeds of bone. These effigies of terror are known for striking deep within the heart of an enemy's territory, causing havoc wherever they ride. A Night Rider will strike down a foe without the slightest hint of mercy, be it a Settler tilling his field or a warrior prepared for battle. There are even stories that tell of vast hordes of Night Riders in search of new blood for their masters, making their way across the ocean floor to territories unknown.

@@Ranger
These woodsmen are great trackers. Rangers are best used for reconnaissance; send them out early in search of treasures, scrolls, and the armies of other nations. A Ranger is normally strong enough to defend against many foes, including the barbaric creatures that roam the wild lands. For this reason, they are useful for discovering where the secrets of the land are hidden, then making a quick retreat if overwhelmed by enemy forces. This serious bunch may not be any good at casual pub chatter, but many of the best stories of adventure and monsters concern their exploits--if you can pry the information from a Ranger's hesitant lips after he returns from a mission.

@@Infidel Horseman
The horsemen of the Infidel nation are mounted warriors native to the wild lands. Greatly skilled, these riders provide fine support to the Golden Horde. For the Infidels, riding is as normal and natural as walking is for most other creatures. These units are used as scouts and outriders for the main army, usually in preparation for a major siege. Infidel horsemen are often bandits, ready to strike for a quick profit (and instill a little fear).

@@Giant Otterine
Starting with simple sea otters, the Merfolk selectively raised and bred these creatures into huge monsters dedicated to following the will of their masters. Decades ago, the shaman of the Merfolk discovered a sparse deep-sea plant life of unusually high nutrient value. This secret food, the location of which is to this day known to the shamans, was cultivated over many years and fed to these captive otters. Over time, the program bore monstrous fruit, in the form of the Giant Otterine. The Merfolk have found this creature useful for scouting the sea--the otterines have highly developed senses. Their size also gives them the ability to ignore most structural defenses, which is quite helpful when besieging an enemy city.

@@Crag Wolf
Crag Wolves are fast and menacing--most lethal hunters. They are a giant breed of wolf who share with goblins a taste for rotting flesh. Of course, as wolves, they also like a fresh and feisty warrior now and then. When the Goblins of Galantee Crest came south to join in the legendary Goblin War, their bands of great Crag Wolves spread fear throughout the land. This was the first time these beasts had been tamed to combat, and the prospect of facing a legion of these creatures in battle made even weathered veterans search for other employment.

@@Ice Drake
Ice Drakes are best thought of as cousins to Dragons. Though they resemble their larger cousins, Ice Drakes have genetic flaws that rob them of the power that is true dragonhood. Unable to fly and lacking the strength and endurance of a true Dragon, the Ice Drake has become quite cunning. Knowing that all the races wish to have Dragons on their side, the Ice Drakes hire out their abilities to the highest bidder, thus becoming a type of super-mercenary. Intelligent enough to realize their own weaknesses (though they would never admit to them), the Ice Drakes have learned to breath the water of the oceans. This is one place where they outshine their great and powerful cousins the Dragons, for the great lizard have no power under the sea.

@@Treefolk
What we today call Treefolk are the degenerate descendants of an ancient race of sentient plants of immense size and strength. Of course, you would never call one "degenerate" where it could hear you, any more than you would ask to count its rings. The sheer size and strength of most members of this elder race is enough to convince most enemies not to attack Elf cities, for fear that one or more Treefolk might be near by and come to the defense.

@@Catapult
Catapults come in many forms. This one, also called the ballista, is an ancient weapon used to fire large spears and harpoon-like weapons in order to destroy larger military units and city structures. It resembles an immense crossbow, and even one of these adds quite a punch to any army. For the most part, these catapults are used in large-scale sieges, when launching weapons from a distance well out of range of arrows is the goal. Missiles can be shot over the walls to set fire and wreak havoc inside the protected city. Due to its bulk and awkward maneuvering, the catapult can only be used on land. To attempt to take it anywhere else would be unwise at best.

@@Siege Engine
Siege Engines are a relatively inexpensive and versatile offensive force. After all, lobbing fifty to a hundred arrows at a foe in a matter of seconds is quite a feat. Siege Engines have even been known to seriously wound dragons. While cheap to produce, Siege Engines are flawed; it is a slow and clumsy machine. Thus, it is vitally important that engines be placed and used in locations where they can attack first or bunker down hard--like in the mountains. Though far from defenseless if attacked, the engine is an offensive device, and not to be relied upon to defend any location.

@@Bombard
When alchemists had discovered the black powder, kingdoms began creating large weapons to use this invention in a most destructive way. The Bombard is a popular weapon for dispersing armies and wounding larger creatures. The great thing about these is that they are not as large as other siege weapons, so a Bombard will fit nicely into the cramped tunnels of the underground world and function well there. Unfortunately, it is still much too heavy to be used in the clouds, and the black powder does not itself work under water.

@@Great Bats
Giant bats swarm from the deepest caves to answer the call of the Goblin Kings and the Stygian Dark Lords. Taking flight, Great Bats can engulf any foe that tries to enter the under realms. With their four foot wing span and two inch talons, Great Bats are adept fighters and can make short work of most flying creatures--and deal considerable damage to ground creatures, as well. Though not the most loyal creatures, and unable to fly to far from land, Great Bats do have a place in the underworld armies, because through sheer numbers, bats have been known to make areas uninhabitable for most races.

@@Witch
Long ago, the darkness came upon the witches, and a pact was made. In exchange for a life of servitude, the dark lords granted each witch three gifts. Long nights were spent teaching witches the arts of flight, the incantations of power, and the secret of far sight. In the end, the witches proved themselves worthy of the effort. Valuable as scouts, warriors, and hunters, witches ride throughout the night skies terrorizing the land in the name of their dark lords. Always vigilant, witches will swoop down upon any foe that enters the realm of their dark masters, and they will gladly sacrifice their own lives to protect their realms.

@@Great Wizard
The Great Wizards have but two true devotions, their secret arcane arts and the protection of humanity. Nothing else has any meaning to these masters of magic. Great Wizards consider the realm of man to be all the land, sea, and sky--as far as they are concerned, the underworld and deep oceans should be left to what they call the "lesser forms" of man. Through their arcane magic, Great Wizards are able to fly at the speed of a dragon, melt most normal armor, and see far beyond the range of human sense. Guarding the realm of humans, the Great Wizards strike down all invaders. Stories say that their power is so great that just a few of these wizards are able to bring down creatures as powerful as dragons.

@@Skidbladnir
Skidbladnir is a celestial flying ship crafted by the gods. It is a powerful warship created for use against the great deep-sea monster the Kraken when it first awakened from its place of rest in the volcanic Tridium stretch. Once this father of all sea monsters had been destroyed, the gods realized that they had invested too much power in these ships, and in fear they tried to hide the fleet from mortals. When one was found, centuries later, it was quickly discovered that these ships can no longer remain aloft for long periods, and must be berthed frequently in cities. The Skidbladnir is a masterpiece of innovation and would be the perfect ship for a hero.

@@Ellida
Afraid of the unfettered power they had unleashed with the Skidbladnir, the gods tried to rectify this mistake by creating the Ellida. This is another flying ship, but one not quite as powerful as the Skidbladnir. The gods intentionally made this ship more decorative, in hopes of fooling mortals into believing that this was simply a more beautiful version of the Skidbladnir. This vessel can fly over the sea and attack flying enemies in the air, but it must always return immediately to a city or to rest on the back of a Kraken or it will exhaust its mystical energies and crash to the ground.

@@Longboat
Sooner or later, all cultures need to expand beyond their borders and into new lands. The longboat is the first vessel large enough and reliable enough to move troops from one land mass to another. Able to carry two full loads of troops, the longboat has shown itself to be a valuable asset to every race except the Merfolk (who seem to have no interest in building boats). Its hull thinned for speed and laden down with troops, a longboat must always be cautious of storms and high waves, for these will sink a vessel that strays too far from shore.

@@Dragon Boat
Dragon Boats are far superior to Longboats in every aspect, and quickly made the use of longboats unnecessary. (The Merfolk are still unimpressed.) A Dragon Boat is able to carry four full complements of troops. They have a much thicker hull and the design of the sails is much improved over that of the longboat. All of this allows the Dragon Boat to travel farther, faster, and more safely than any longboat ever made--for the same cost as the average longboat. Every race that gains knowledge of Dragon Boats quickly replaces their earlier vessels. Fleets of Dragon Boats have caused the fall of many cultures, primarily due to their ability to move vast numbers of troops. This excellence does, however, have the effect of drawing too much attention to these vessels, and they are prime targets for enemy attack.

@@Old Man
Old Men are thought by most to be nothing more than dirty little hermits that roam the mountainsides, foraging for food and fearing intrusion into their secretive lives. This is not the case, and those who know the truth are both happy and annoyed by the knowledge. The happiness comes from the fact that Old Men are some of the most powerful forces for good in the realm. An Old Man is glad to lend a hand, and he has the power to back up his promise. The annoyance comes from the fact that Old Men are very, very lonely and quite often mentally unbalanced. Once they attach themselves to a place, a cause, or a race, it is nearly impossible to get rid of them. They're often underfoot while trying to lend a hand, and they can truly test the patience of even the most noble of leaders.

@@Shield Boat
Because each of these ships includes in its construction a beam fashioned from the wood of Yggdrasil, the World Tree, each can descend to the ocean's depths, impervious to water and pressure. The Shield Boat is small by necessity, and can hold only 2 units. Still, any vessel that allows ventures to the coral gardens of Shrimblee is a welcome addition to any fleet. Though it looks awkward compared to the god-ships Skidbladnir and Ellida, the Shield Boat is of clever design and quite useful in quests and exploration.

@@Unspeakable Horror
The Unspeakable Horror fell upon this world with a thunderous crash. Torn from its home world, where cries of torment echo throughout the land, blood rains from the skies, and fire fills the oceans, it now wanders the realms of Midgard in raging loneliness. Ripping through the land rather then passing over it, the Horror leaves a slimy trail of decay wherever it goes. It is said that this monstrosity skins its victims slowly with its acidic slime, taking an almost joyous glee in the agonies of its prey. The Horror has been known to take hours to devour an enemy in this manner. Strangely enough, this is the death that those familiar with the Horror would prefer, for it is the fastest and least torturous that the Horror inflicts.

@@Paladin
A thunderous roar as they close for combat is the last sound most paladins' foes ever hear. Wearing full field plate and riding huge barded war horses, paladins are an impressive sight on any field of battle. Paladins are the greatest knights in the realms of man, riding the purest steeds, and wearing the best armor possible. A paladin's devotion and belief in humanity is unshakable. After winning many legendary victories and saving many lives, paladins have become the unofficial symbol of hope and prosperity for humans everywhere. It is said that any settlement guarded by even one paladin just feels safer, the crops grow better, and the people are happier.

@@Changeling
Changelings are unique individuals who possess the ability to alter their physical form. Most often, this power manifests itself in early adolescence, when the person begins changing back and forth between normal form and that of a bear-like creature. This is the most common alternate form, and the one that warriors with this ability seem to be most comfortable using. For no known reason, changelings also possess the ability to magically transport themselves a great distance out of any city. The bear-man is quite a fierce creature, and it should not be taken lightly in combat. Far too many foolhardy fighters have underestimated these warriors and not lived to tell the tale.

@@Mountain Giant
Mountain Giants are not the largest giants in the land, and in fact are considered by some to be large humans (which is not the truth). Their smaller size in comparison to creatures like ogres does not change the fact that they are still vastly powerful creatures. Not large enough to simply hop over the protective walls of cities like Ogres can, the Mountain Giant is still able to cross great distances through the toughest terrain in little time. As is true of most giants, the Mountain Giant makes a mockery of most cavalry troops, and can be one of the most deadly creatures in the world when protecting its home range.

@@Ogre
The Ogre is the undisputed giant of the underworld Goblin armies. A gigantic and powerful creature, a single Ogre can make mincemeat of most cavalry. In stories, Ogres are often described as vaulting over defensive walls of cities. These stories are not far from the truth. It is well known to the Goblins that a few Ogres can easily capture a city that relies too heavily on the safety of its walls. The most notorious instance of this was the battle at Newcastle, a human settlement that had gained a reputation for the wonders it produced. The ground sank one day, and 6 Ogres emerged. Newcastle assaulted with five full units of Rangers, leaving two groups of Housecarls to guard the city walls. The Rangers were able to kill one--and only one--Ogre before they were all lost. The Housecarls stood no chance, and the city fell within an hour.

@@Great Eagle
The Great Eagles are a proud and majestic race, found and befriended long ago by the Buteo empire. They feel a kinship with the Buteo, and Great Eagles will aid this race whenever they're able. Often, Great Eagles are seen flying high above the Buteo cities, surveying their lands and protecting their people. Great Eagles are know for their razor sharp talons, axe-like beaks, and fierce attacking strikes. Even with the dangers of facing them well known, Great Eagles are still heavily sought after by wizards--for their feathers, which are used in spells and potions of flight.

@@Fell Wraith
Sometimes a creature dies in such a way that its body is lost, but the soul remains in Midgard. These shadows can be controlled and used by any dark master who knows the art of trapping souls before they pass on. Having lost the bindings of flesh and bone, these creatures make perfect hunters. They have no need for sleep or food, nor are they prone to the urges for wine and women. A Fell Wraith does not age, and it will never stop in its pursuit of a victim. It is said that there are only two ways to escape a wraith. One is to kill it before it kills you (difficult at best), and the other is to die in some other way before it reaches you.

@@Tree Guard
Perhaps it is obvious, but the Tree Guard spring from the same ancient race that sired the Treefolk. Although these trees are generally non-aggressive and favor peace in all things, they are blessed by nature with a gift for camouflage and toughness. Since time immemorial, they have remained in their same locations and fiercely guarded those spots from all dangers. (This protection is the reason certain races tend to build cities around them.) Theories as to why Treefolk move but Tree Guards do not abound, but the Tree Guards themselves will say only that they refuse to move in honor of an age old promise.

@@Thunderbolt
From the heavens to the earth, a blinding, crackling flash strikes down onto foes with the force of vengeance. The Thunderbolt is unimaginable until one has experienced it firsthand and lived to tell the tale. The poets tell of how the volcano god forged the first thunderbolts for the hand of Odin. This mighty magic is difficult to master. If your wizards have somehow managed to recreate the secret process the Great Smith used in that long gone day, you, too, could wield a power formerly reserved for the patriarch of the gods.

@@Fireball
NOTICE: YOU CANNOT BUILD FIREBALLS UNTIL SOMEONE FIRST COMPLETES THE PANDORA'S BOX WONDER.
Be certain that your foes do not acquire knowledge of the Fireball before you, or your cities will burn as the funeral pyre of your empire. No weapon--real or legendary--is more destructive. Be wary yourself of using these, for unmatched power has its own cost. The fireball's all-encompassing devastation breeds a lingering threat to the land. An ancient prophecy suggests that the earth itself will rebel against the use of such patently irresponsible magic. Playing with fire can get you burned.

@@Skald
Although every Skald is human, all races use the poets. Blessed with the ability to understand all the world's different dialects and a cunning charisma that seems to make even the Stygians smile, the Skald makes the perfect universal diplomat. Not known for fighting prowess, a Skald's greatest weapon is his mouth. Skalds have often been known to talk their way out of bad situations, swaying the allegiance of once-hostile opponents with a simple gesture of a monetary gain. These are the kings of quick thinking, and it is always wise to hire a Skald and the skills he possesses.

@@Fairy
Though innocent in appearance and manner, these seemingly shy creatures are capable of the most subversive and underhanded activities--if they believe the cause is just. Individual Fairies (there is no organized Fairy nation) have allied themselves with both Humans and Elves, but they recoil from alliance with any of the other races. Fairy folk are some of the most cunning and persuasive creatures in Midgard, but their fondness for wine, gold, and playful fun is often their undoing.

@@Caravan
Trade is essential to a fruitful civilization. Commerce and goods can strengthen the ties that bind you and your allies together--and deliver a tidy profit, as well. Journeying to distant lands, caravans can exchange their goods for those of far off cities, especially those that need what you produce. From hides to spice to uranium, most lands are only rich in a few and lack the rest. With your caravans, you can open trade routes that generate a good income, transport needed food from city to city, or carry raw materials and work crews to a city to help in the construction of wonders.

@@Triton Legion
Only the best and most courageous of the Merguard have the opportunity to join the Triton Legion. The tests are tough and the training tougher, including more than one visit to the feared Caverns of Trinity, where the luckier and more skilled among the applicants come away with a prize steed, while others fail to come back at all. Wielding a large trident, the Triton Legionnaire is an highly respected opponent even among the higher ranking warriors of other civilizations.

@@Jack O' Lantern
The Jack of the Lantern is a strange creature that many alchemists theorize are possessed vegetables--possessed by what is the question. As they are not very aggressive and generally have stories that intrigue those who listen, Jacks O'Lantern are found in most societies. These odd creatures seem to have no fear of venturing into the underworld or roaming the ocean floors. Only the skies are off limits to them. Jacks O'Lantern work very cheaply, and somehow always seem to find the fastest route to their destination, even when passing through uncharted territories. This makes the Jack O'Lantern extremely valuable as an inexpensive scout and forager of resources.

@@Skeleton
Though their wills have long since been stripped from their bodies, bones will always serve the right master. Skeletons are the perfect beasts of burden. Easily controlled and completely loyal, they scour the land and seas for their dark masters in search of secrets and treasures untold. These automatons of darkness never tire, never stop, and never, ever show any signs of sorrow or remorse for their actions. A skeleton's only duty, its only cause, is to serve the whims of its creator. Magically cheap and quite effective, a skeleton's only real drawback is the fact that no known spell can imbue it with the power of flight.

@@Barrow Wight
When a warrior is struck down in battle, sometimes their rage is so great that it will not leave this world. When this happens, a wight rises from the ashes of the fallen fighter to roam the land. These creatures cause havoc wherever they pass. Drawn to the sent of battle, a Barrow Wight is quick to show allegiance to its new dark master and eager to show its skill as a killer. The blood-lust of a wight and the incredible speed at which they can close in on a foe makes any group of them perfect shock troops.

@@Porpoise Pod
The Porpoise Pods are groups of highly intelligent fish used solely by the Merfolk as quick transportation through the ocean depths--and even above the sea. Due to their natural camouflage and keen senses, the pods are able to avoid being seen by the majority of life both in and out of the sea. Their size and strength is limited, and a pod is generally able to carry only one military unit. Porpoise Pods are sometimes used to transport Fireballs and Lightning Bolts, which is only possible because of their magical nature and incredible agility.

@@Lich
Not all skeletons lose their souls. Some hold on to their existence in this world through sheer force of will. Unwilling to pass on, these stubborn souls remain in their rotting bodies, festering in the hatred that is the only focus of their new existence. With a maleficent disgust for the living, these creatures are quick to join with a dark lord and his minions. In the service of an evil lord, they are free to gather their powers unhindered, until called on by their masters to perform whatever task requires the strength and abilities of a creature this foul. A Lich is a powerful puppet with the ability to rain down vast amounts of damage on its foe. These undead creatures are feared on the sea as widely as on  land.

@@Baba Yaga
The legendary witch seems to have lent her power to the Infidels. Long known for her odd behavior--many a midnight wanderer has witnessed her counting silverware or the fingers of the dead--the Baba Yaga rides around the world in her wooden pot and lashes out at a whim to destroy even the heartiest of warriors. She has no difficulty underwater, for she has no need to breathe as mortals do. The Baba Yaga does not travel the cramped tunnels of the underground, however, though no one knows why.

@@Frost Giant
The ground shakes a bit, then a moment later again. It happens yet a third time, and a slight snow slide falls from the rock face next to you. You glance around and wonder why the temperature has suddenly dropped 20 degrees, when without further warning you're pinned to the ground by the icy crushing blow of the Frost Giant's hand. This family of giants have, historically, been the enemy of anyone whom they view as interlopers on their land--and what they consider "their" land is vast. Strong as they are, these leviathans of the land do have weaknesses--avarice among them.

@@Giant Spider
"Feed a Giant Spider once and it will be loyal to you for the rest of its life," said the legendary beast-master Gorkus. Goblins originally sought to use Giant Spiders as mounts, but quickly learned that the spiders were too intelligent to be wasted carrying troops on their backs. Giant Spiders are now used on their own, and they make great guards. Their slow speed can hinder them in an offensive assault, but on the defense, their nearly silent movement gives them an element of surprise and the spider's thick exoskeleton armor can deflect some of the heaviest blows.

@@Kraken
The Kraken are the fathers of all cephalopods and the masters of the sea--as dragons are masters of the land and sky. With their enormous size and strength, the Kraken often allow flying creatures to land on their broad backs to rest and regain their energy. There are many unanswered questions about the Kraken, including their origin and abilities. We know that porpoise pods and other stealthy water creatures cannot hide from them, but even the oldest mages were surprised to hear recently that a dragon sunning near the beach at Kitteron was suddenly pulled under by what witnesses described as a Kraken's constricting tentacles. Although the struggle was fierce and horrifying, it ended with a steamy trail of bubbles leading off into the sea; the dragon did not reappear.

@@Ancient Dragon
Dragons are generally thought of as the most powerful creatures in existence, but what most people don't know is that the older a dragon gets, the more powerful it becomes. Most dragons encountered by adventurers are relatively young--three to four hundred years old. They're just pups. Some dragons live well beyond their vulnerable youth, and these become the "Ancient" or "Elder" Dragons. Even the normally fearless younger dragons will hesitate before attacking one of these powerful creatures. Even though some of them have lost the ability to take flight (dragons never stop growing, and their still-powerful wings eventually become unable to lift their great mass), this does not hinder them in the slightest during combat, and many fools have met a grisly fate by trusting in the belief that a grounded dragon would be an easy target.

@@Jormungand's Spit
Jormungand is the serpent who girdles the earth. For reasons mere mortals cannot fathom, it periodically spits out foul flying beasts called Jormungand's Spit, which fly forth to wreak the havoc and chaos the serpent cherishes. Typically traveling in pairs, these overly energetic menaces to the world attack by spitting flame and screeching. The sound of their approach is enough to cause most foes to panic and run. Their continuous intertwining makes them difficult to strike, but if an opponent can avoid their flame, these menaces prove not too thick of skin. Even so, they are not easily killed and shouldn't be taken lightly.

@@Warlock
The Warlock is a magical flying being. Its original race remains unknown, as the long-term use of twisted magic has permanently erased any trace of whatever mortal being it once was. Warlocks have no difficulty breathing under water, but these powerful beings seem quite reluctant to enter the cramped caves and heavy air of the underground regions. If a civilization hires one of these warped magical creatures, it is only to gain a slight edge in the air, for the Warlock's first allegiance is to its guild, and the highest bidder for its skills ranks a far second.

@@Human Hero
Riding through the realm on well kept steeds, hair flowing in the wind and teeth twinkling bright, are the heroes of humankind. Lending aid where it is needed and always fighting the good fight, Human Heroes are the talk of the land. While there are heroes in every realm, helping every race, and great books have been written about many of them, none are as awe-inspiring as the tales told of the Human Heroes and their adventures. Other heroes, so the stories go, cannot defeat dragons single handed, nor stop storms and volcanoes from destroying towns, but it is clearly documented in the books of man that these feats are but the merest glimpses into the power of a true Human Hero.

@@Great Goblin
Sometimes the Goblin gods bless a certain member of that race, raising them far above the norm for their kind. Great Goblins are monstrous compared to the rest of their ilk. Standing on average seven feet tall and weighing up to 500 pounds, a Great Goblin is a fierce creature. Loyal beyond compare, a Great Goblin makes a strong addition to any Goblin army. Great Goblins are also known for their strong wills, determination, and willingness to fight alone, which is rather uncommon for most of Goblin society. They are highly versatile and rather intelligent (for a Goblin), and it is difficult to find something a Great Goblin is not useful for--except possibly dragon hunting.

@@Merfolk Hero
Legend has is that Merfolk Heroes are the children of Merfolk visited in the night by the sea-god Aegir. It is said that when there is great distress and need, Aegir blesses a worthy family to birth and raise one of these demigod children. The hero's purpose is to rise amongst the Merfolk and lead them out of calamity--to aid them in conquering their adversaries. Being direct children of Aegir, these heroes can never be convinced to leave service before their task is done, nor can material wealth sway them from their allegiance.

@@Infidel Hero
In dark times, when the Infidel race is threatened, it is prophesied that a hero will be born to strike down their foes and lead his people to empire once again. There would be no braver soul in defense of the Infidel civilization--and none so single-minded. His loyalty will remained unsullied, his tenacity unmatched. When this sort of hero arises, one can only hope that their destiny does not lead them against you.

@@Buteo Hero
The heroes of the Buteo are perhaps the most impressive of all the races. What other hero glides gracefully through the air, light glinting off of their shining silver armor and their razor sharp swords, silver wings spread full to catch the air? When they're soaring above all others in their magnificence, even other Buteo fly lower in the sky out of respect for their heroes. The most loyal Buteo of them all, the heroes will defend their lands and people from all hostile invaders. These units have even been known to attack dragons in a futile attempt to stop their assault, for a Buteo Hero's greatest reward is to die in the service of its people.

@@Elf Hero
It is told that whenever the need is great enough, heroes of Elven stock appear without warning, come to the focal point in a time of need, and help out when the race has its back to the wall. These noble individuals are revered as the mightiest Elves of all. The Elf Hero has the strength, determination, and power to track down and slay great beasts.  This is the ally you need when hunting a marauding dragon and giants of all kinds. The hero's loyalty is renowned, but, of course, each one has a will of his own and follows no master unquestioningly--you cannot disband him, nor can he be bribed.

@@Stygian Lord
If ever there was a creature more foul than the Lich, it is the Stygian Lord. Though it lacks the Lich's body of bone and rotting flesh, the Stygian Lord is actually a type of Lich. The spirit of a Stygian Lord is bound to the land by powerful spells, and it may not venture into other realms. This does not change the fact that a Stygian Lord is perhaps the most powerful undead creature ever encountered. Legends of acts of terror and pure viciousness committed by these creatures are written in the books of every race.

@@Merfolk Settler
At the dawn of their civilization, the Merfolk sent out settlers to lands both above and below the sea, to prevent any single disaster from destroying the entire Merfolk race. The Merfolk settlers, like all settlers, consider it their duty to insure a decent living for the populace. With skills and duties so diverse they can hardly be enumerated, these folk are irreplaceable. It would be difficult to imagine any civilization surviving without the settlers building cities and maintaining and improving the land.

@@Buteo Settler
Buteo settlers are blessed with the gift of flight, as are all Buteo, but the settler is also a gifted craftsmen, able to make even the most mundane of projects into a work of art. Buteo settlers, like all settlers, are burdened with the heavy tools and materials of their trade, which constrain how high a Buteo settler can fly and limits their maneuverability. With the weight of their tools always on their backs, many of these useful folk have been lost from exhaustion in vain attempts to cross the vastness of the skies between clouds. Not wishing to lose such important members of their society, the Buteo passed a law forbidding their settlers from crossing the open skies or the waters of the world below under any circumstances.

@@Goblin Miner
Goblin Miners and Dwarves are the only beings that know the secrets of tunneling through the bedrock of the earth. While it is said that Dwarven tunnels are far superior to Goblin tunnels, it is the goblins who do most of the excavation in the underworld. Short and robust little creatures, the goblin miners are constantly digging in hopes of finding new treasures and more exits to the surface world--where they are quite happy to exploit all the natural resources before returning to the darkness of the underworld. Goblin miners are instrumental in helping with attacks on the upworlders, and many cities have been caught off guard when Goblins started pouring out of a tunnel that suddenly appeared at a city's front gate.

@@Elf Settler
As they are for most races, the settlers of the Elven tribes are the heart and soul of the nation. These hardy groups build the cities and roads, plow the lands, and can even purge corrosion from the terrain. Anyone who has had the privilege of visiting an Elf city has seen firsthand the beautifully crafted architecture and calm-inducing design and landscaping done by these talented builders. Without Elf Settlers, there would be no Elven civilization.

@@Stygian Settler
Stygian settlers are spoken of as the "sparks of darkness", for wherever these undead build their towers, darkness grows and evil spreads like a plague. Often, a Stygian settler is raised from a well-known architect or artist, and even though they have lost most of their knowledge during their brief death, they still posses enough skill to do manual labor, and most can be given instructions for more elaborate projects. Though not inherently aggressive, these creatures can prove to be the deadliest of foes, for without these servants to till the land and forage for resources, the dark lords would be lost. Thus, the dark ones protect their servants.

@@War Elephant
Certain individual Infidels spend their youth in study learning to control these mammoth beasts. No other race has yet succeeded in taming even one. The War Elephant is one of the most intimidating creatures to face in the heat of battle. During the battle at Grungus Ward, the Infidel trainers stampeded more than sixty war elephants through massive barriers to drive the forces of the Goblin General Bogaa from their stronghold in the Caves of Eldercraven.

@@Giant Flytrap
Dionaea Muscipula Giganteum--commonly known as the Giant Flytrap--was first reported deep within the haunted forest of Xylocus. (This might or might not have been the first time it was discovered.) The species was named after a local coven, who are suspected of having whipped up these spectacular carnivorous plants to generate a fear of the forest--to prevent unwanted intrusion on their activities. Whatever their roots, the Flytraps have spread through the world, and some races have learned how to raise and train them to act as city guards.

@@Dragon
The most feared, most lethal, and most highly respected creatures to roam Midgard are the dragons. These great beasts can dispatch any hero without breaking a sweat. Their greed for treasures makes them dangerous to any city, yet this same greed often proves their undoing. The tales of past nations fallen to members of this most intelligent species are numerous, as are the paintings, ancient prophecies, and artifacts created to honor this mysterious being.

@@Griffin
A Griffin is one of the most exotic creatures in the realm--half lion, half eagle, and all fierce. It is believed that Griffins were invented by a mad wizard centuries ago--perhaps on purpose, perhaps by accident. Either way, the Griffins have since established themselves as a race--a very prolific race. Griffins build nests and lay eggs in the higher clouds. It is said that a Griffin's nest can hold great treasures, but adventurers should always be wary. If an adult Griffin catches you rummaging through its nest, disturbing their golden eggs, you're in deep trouble. Even if you have Griffins on your side, the defenders of a nest will attack mercilessly to protect their eggs--from friend and foe alike.

@@Worm
The Worm is a distant relative of Jormungand and the spit serpents. These immense creatures live beneath the soil and feed off anything living, both above and below the ground. Remaining unnoticed under the surface, they suddenly rise up out of the ground and bite--their mouths are lined with row upon row of tiny, dagger-like teeth. A Worm's skin is quite difficult to penetrate, and their ability to burrow unseen makes them difficult to track.


@TERRAIN_AND_RESOURCE_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@TERRAIN_INDEX
10,			;Haunted Forest
30,			;Wildlands
8,			;Glade
18,			;Old Forest
11,			;Hills
16,			;Mountains
1,			;Blasted Lands
12,			;Ice Barrens
19,			;Primeval Swamp
29,			;Wastelands
17,			;Ocean
24,			;Spirits
15,			;Mammoth
8,			;Glade
7,			;Giant Elk
13,			;Iron
9,			;Gold
3,			;Dragon Lair
14,			;Jormungand
26,			;Tar Pit
21,			;Salt
22,			;Sea Monster
25,			;Sulfurous Vent
2,			;Cave Bear
8,			;Glade
4,			;Fairy Ring
28,			;Volcano
23,			;Silver
5,			;Gem Mine
20,			;Rainbow
27,			;Timber
6,			;Geyser
0,			;Armored Fishes
47,			;Sea Floor
46,			;Sea Bed
-1,			;NONE
32,			;Coral Reef
52,			;Trench
16,			;Mountains
87,			;Mantlerock
36,			;Ice Cap
45,			;Sargasso Sea
50,			;Smoker
43,			;Ocean Depths
44,			;Oyster Bed
38,			;Kelp Forest
-1,			;NONE
34,			;Fish School
41,			;Lava Vent
42,			;Mineral Deposit
-1,			;Granite Vein
37,			;Ice Nodule
33,			;Eels
51,			;Sulfides
39,			;Krill
-1,			;Oyster Bed
-1,			;Kelp Forest
-1,			;NONE
48,			;Sea Garden
-1,			;Lava Vent
-1,			;Mineral Deposit
-1,			;Granite Vein
-1,			;Ice Nodule
-1,			;Eels
-1,			;Sulfides
49,			;Shipwreck
31,			;Bedrock
58,			;Fire Chamber
56,			;Cave of Wonders
65,			;Ice Chamber
70,			;Tunnel
54,			;Blue Room
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;NONE
69,			;Slime Cave
53,			;Bat Cavern
71,			;Vaulted Sea
-1,			;Granite Vein
59,			;Fire Spout
62,			;Gilt Sword
61,			;Gems
57,			;Diamonds
60,			;Fungal Groves
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;NONE
63,			;Green Slime
64,			;Guano
55,			;Cave Fish
-1,			;Granite Vein
-1,			;Fire Spout
-1,			;Gilt Sword
-1,			;Gems
66,			;Inky Pool
67,			;Limestone
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;Green Slime
-1,			;Guano
68,			;Plesiosaur
75,			;Hurricane
-1,			;Hurricane
-1,			;NONE
86,			;White Cloud
76,			;Magic Cloud
81,			;Storm Cloud
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;NONE
72,			;Cyclone
83,			;Typhoon
80,			;Sky
73,			;Eye
-1,			;Eye
-1,			;NONE
79,			;Ozone Hole
77,			;Magic Node
82,			;Thunderhead
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;Eye
-1,			;Eye
84,			;Updraft
-1,			;Eye
-1,			;Eye
-1,			;NONE
85,			;Whirlwind
78,			;Northern Lights
74,			;Heat Lightning
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;NONE
-1,			;Eye
-1,			;Eye
-1,			;Updraft
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Armored Fishes
It is easy to think of the sea as a calm and peaceful environment. Seen from above, it seems quiet and slow, with soothing waves and graceful creatures. The reality of life beneath the waves is far from tranquil, however; the struggle for survival is just as harsh and brutal as it is on land. Many sea creatures have developed ways of protecting themselves from all but the most pernicious attackers; the armored fishes are but one example. These otherwise typical--and tasty--fish cover themselves with bony plates to ward off the teeth and spines of undersea predators.

@@Blasted Lands
What blasted the Blasted Lands? The answer to this question might forever remain buried in mystery, but if you choose to believe, there are many who would speculate. One legend has it that a great battle was waged between the gods, and some of their bolts fell to earth, searing the ground. Another claims that molten stone sometimes wells up out of the ground (doubtless the work of dwarves) and burns away everything it touches. Still another tale tells of a curse sealed in a glass sphere; when the sphere was broken, the shards fell upon the earth, and where they fell, the land was made barren. Whatever the truth of the matter, these are threatening areas, not lightly trod.

@@Cave Bear
It is not common knowledge in every village, but those who have traveled widely know that the bears, like humans, are divided into many families. There are black and brown bears, fishing bears and hunting bears, the Great Bear and the were-bear, and more. Perhaps the best known to civilized folk is the cave bear. These animals are dangerous, but the warmth of their fur and the fuel made from their fat allows many children to survive the winter when otherwise they would not. Before hunting cave bear, it is important to learn when to go out and which to capture. If we do not hunt wisely, so that the bear family continues to thrive, then we will soon find that there are no bears to hunt, and our children will freeze.

@@Dragon Lair
Do not be misled by the fanciful stories of heroes--a man who enters the lair of a dragon must first be certain that the inhabitant is not at home, else the man will not leave the lair except as bones. The wise remember the laircatcher's simple chant: "Though there might be treasure large or small, if the dragon's about it will kill you all."

@@Fairy Ring
Though it might seem fragile and insignificant, a small circle of mushrooms (some say toadstools) found in the depths of the forest could be a fairy ring. There are many tales and legends concerning these places or power, and some contradict others. What is sure is that the fae folk place great value in these spots, and wielders of magic prize them as well. It is also sure that many unwise villagers have disappeared in forests near where fairy rings are known to be. Do not be fooled by their beauty; the faeries are not like other folk, and can be as deadly as any creature.

@@Gem Mine
Gemstones, treasured throughout time for their beauty and value, have always been a sought-after commodity. Gems are especially coveted, for reason unknown to humankind, by the denizens of the underground lands. Though gem deposits are sometimes found on the surface, the real lodes are obtained only through mining. This is a dangerous endeavor, however, and a surprising number of abandoned mines can be found--perfectly good sites that were left unexploited when the original miners were killed in an accident.

@@Geyser
You can recognize a geyser by the bare stone circle surrounding it. It is a hole in the earth, from which scalding water and mud often erupt. The heat clears the ground nearby of all living things. What is a geyser? A water spirit, of course, trapped in the earth by some enemy as punishment for an evil deed or a lost battle. If the spirit is confined too near the surface, it can vent its rage through any crack in the bedrock, spewing its bile and anger into the air.

@@Giant Elk
Even a normal elk is a large creature, though a good bowman can bring one down handily. The giant elk is thought by some to be magical in nature, but  there is no clear evidence of that. Perhaps it is this animal that the Great Hunt seeks when it roams the night. In any case, one of these will provide meat for a village for several days, and every part of this noble beast finds some use. Just be sure that the hunting party includes several strong archers and bearers, for the great elk are not easily brought down, nor are they a pleasant load to carry.

@@Glade
In every forest or any area in which the undergrowth is thick, travel and trade are hampered by the brush. Thus, a clearing or glade is always a welcome sight to any hiker's eyes. Those who practice magic, too, know the worth of a glade. It is in these pleasant spots that one can find--if one knows the secret ways of such folk--sylphs and brownies, dryads and even fairies. Though the perils of dealing with these creatures are wel known, the rewards can be great for a skillful user of magic.

@@Gold
Gold has always been one of the most highly valued metals in the world. It is used in many spells and conjurings, and even in the manufacture of jewelry. Gold has been established as the basis for monetary systems throughout the world. The factors that make gold valuable are its rarity and ability to channel magical energies. Although gold can be found in many different areas, the most valuable deposits are large veins of gold ore running through mountains. When a large deposit is found, mining the deposit greatly boosts the economy in settlements near the mine. 

@@Haunted Forest
At night, any unfamiliar forest is a frightening place. Trees rustle, creatures skulk about, and every tickling leaf could be a wolf's breath on your cheek. Imagine, then, how it must be to spend a night in a wood that you know is home to spirits of the dead. Many a hapless traveler has gone into a haunted forest never to emerge again. Only magicians value these woods, for the spirits chained to the trees hold secrets and magical energy that a skilled practicioner of the arts can make use of.

@@Hills
Rolling areas of the countryside, often found between flatter land and mountainous regions are known as hills or foothills. These areas, often covered with rich soil and grasses or heavily forested, are rich in resources. Coal, iron, lead, copper, and even gold and silver may be found in these regions, making them profitable areas for the mining industry. In areas where the below-ground resources are scarce, hill areas are often cultivated for agricultural purposes. Certain crops, such as coffee and grapes, thrive in these regions, given the proper climate.

@@Ice Barrens
In the far northern regions of the world, there are vast tracts of barren flat land known as ice barrens. These regions remain locked in winter all the year round; some say this is the result of a long forgotten giant's curse. The soil there is frozen, and nought will grow upon it. Like a dry desert, this region receives little rain or snow, but unlike in the desert, the frozen ground keeps the fall-water from draining away. This allows bogs to form, in which some simple, tough plants can grow. Despite or perhaps because of the harsh environment, a wide variety of beast flourish in the ice barrens, providing possible sources of food for any traveler foolhardy enough to venture there.

@@Iron
When early civilizations began to use metal to construct tools and weapons, the most commonly used metal was bronze. Bronze had the advantage of being readily available and easy to work with. Unfortunately, it was too soft to hold an effective edge. In the early days of weapons manufacture, iron replaced bronze as the metal of choice, especially considering the fact that many magical creatures are highly susceptible to iron. Since this time, iron has been a valuable commodity. Unfortunately, its anti-magical properties make spellcasters jittery in its presence.

@@Jormungand
Jormungand, also known by the names Jormungandr and Iormungandr, is the giant serpent whose body circles the entire world of Midgard. This serpent is the child of Loki and Angerboda, and it is destined to be killed by and to kill Thor at Ragnarok. Jormungand holds its tail in its mouth, and legend has it that any explorer who is brave and hardy enough can climb into the mouth of the serpent without being bitten. Entering the throat of the great serpent, it is told, leads the explorer to another world.

@@Mammoth
Not only are mammoths giant and hairy, but they smell pretty awful, too. If it weren't for the fact that they provide so many useful materials, hunters would probably avoid them. They're that unpleasant--and dangerous. The average bull mammoth stands more than twice the height of a tall man, with curved tusks that can reach half that in length. When confronted by a charging herd of these massive beasts, even dragons (whose sense of smell is keen and well developed) are likely to get out of the way.

@@Mountains
Mountains are areas of high elevation, usually consisting of a chain of rugged peaks and valleys. Most mountains are formed when the plates making up the world's crust impact or slide against one another, raising layers of rock above the surrounding land. Mountains can also be formed by volcanic action, or through the mysterious projects of dwarven engineers. Although generally poor agricultural regions, mountains are often a source of great mineral wealth, with large deposits of gold and other valuable ores. Aside from their economic value, mountains provide a natural defensive barrier, shielding settlements from invaders. Extensive mountain ranges can also greatly affect the weather patterns of a region by blocking and diverting wind and storms.

@@Ocean
The oceans and seas of the world cover almost three-quarters of its surface. They are home to millions of life forms, ranging from microscopic plankton to whales and the legendary Merfolk. The animals and plants that inhabit the sea provide an excellent source of food. For centuries, coastal and island cultures have thrived on the resources and easy access to trade provided by the sea. Unfortunately, in many parts of the world, a combination of over-harvesting of marine animals and increased pollution have begun to threaten fragile coastal ecologies and incur the wrath of the sea-folk.

@@Old Forest
Like people, forests age. A young forest is thick with undergrowth, sports trees of many sizes and species, and provides a haven for small creatures of every type. Older woods, in comparison, have had the time to lay down a thick carpet of litter, which acts like mulch to discourage undergrowth and younger, smaller trees. When you encounter wide, clear paths among thick trunks with little or no sunlight penetrating the forest canopy, you know that you are in an elder wood. Treat these forests with respect, for they are far older than your oldest living relative, and there are creatures living in them that predate the human race.

@@Primeval Swamp
In the days when the gods and giants shaped the land, Midgard took its form from the whims and plans of these powerful beings. Gods and giants can be foolish, but they are wise in their way. Knowing that there is evil in everything (though in differing amounts), the shapers of the land created dark, foul places where creatures of evil might live. This was so that they could live separate from the other creatures, and cause less trouble for them. Of course, it didn't work out that way, but those great swamps still exist, untouched, from the earliest days. Evil creatures do live in these places, but it is also possible for others to take some benefit from them--if they are careful.

@@Rainbow
Bifrost, the Rainbow Bridge that leads from Midgard up to the realm of the gods, is not always accessible. This structure is sometimes linked to the middle land and sometimes not, but it always exists. The path to the gods' land is not so easy to find as it might seem, however. There are many rainbows in the cold lands, and only one of them can be Bifrost. Those that are not might be decoys put there by the jealous gods or they could be natural phenomena of some sort. Whatever the case, the base of a rainbow is a good site for establishing a city, as bounty seems to rain down on these lands.

@@Salt
Salt was at one time used as a medium of commerce, like money. It is not only a tasty addition to prepared foods, but one of nature's most efficient methods for preserving meats and other foodstuffs for long-term storage. Finding outcroppings of salt in the wild is normally a simple matter. The tracker follows the trail of deer or some other ruminant animal, and sooner or later comes on what hunters call a "lick" of salt. It is also possible to derive salt from seawater, but because various minerals and other toxins must be removed from the sea salt to make it edible, it is a more expensive source.

@@Sea Monster
Would that we could put a name to these beasts. Serpents or squid or sea-dragons, we know not the nature of these giant creatures, for once caught and dragged into the air, they soon lose their shape. Even so, their formless bodies are a good source of useful materials. Hunting Sea Monsters is a form of justice. After all, more than one hapless vessel has been dragged beneath the waves in their grasp.

@@Silver
Next to gold, silver is one of the most highly valued metals in the world. Like gold, it is vital for many spells and conjurings and in the manufacture of jewelry. Silver is one of the mainstays of every monetary system in the world. The factors that make silver valuable are its malleability, its magical properties, the fact that many magical creatures are vulnerable to it, and its special sympathetic connection to the moon. Although silver can be found in many different areas, the most valuable deposits are large veins running through mountains.

@@Spirits
The spirits of the dead are not always malicious. In fact, well trained users of magic can very often derive benefit from the existence of a den of such spirits near a city. Certain areas seem to draw ghosts as iron draws magnets, for reasons known only to the spirits themselves and a few wise conjurors. These hapless ghosts cannot leave this plane, and are easily convinced to aid those they once knew, their descendants, and members of their own race.

@@Sulfurous Vent
Beneath the earth there are great chambers filled with vile stenches and noxious fumes. Some are natural, created by volcanic upwelling. Others have a more sinister genesis. Regardless of their origin, these stinks are lighter than the rock surrounding them, and they wish to rise into the open air. The gasses exploit any weakness in the rock to create an escape route. When they do finally reach the surface, the stenches steam out through these vents. This is to the detriment of the local environment, but often proves a boon to nearby wizards and city dwellers.

@@Tar Pit
The world is old beyond knowing. In a time so long past that even legends do not speak of it, the earth moved to the gods' whims, and they created and destroyed many strange animals and plants. Over spans of time so long that the life of a man seems a moment by comparison, dead and buried plant matter decays and becomes tar. Covered by the land, this tar sits idle through the years, until the day that a weakness in the rock allows it to escape. This thick, sticky substance then oozes to the surface, where it can trap hapless animals. Tar has uses in magic and crafts, and sometimes a lucky hunter happens on one of those trapped animals--easy prey.

@@Timber
For the craftsman, wood is perhaps the most useful material found in nature. Stands of timber become homes, wagons, furniture, utensils, decorative art, game pieces, and hundreds of other useful, everyday things. Though the timber itself is of no use to practitioners of magic, the discarded bits--bark, leaves, roots, and so on--are required components of many common spells. Thus, an over-forested area in need of managed clearing is a great resource for any city, especially if it is sustained by cautious cutting--and a little magic.

@@Volcano
There is anger in the earth, and forces that even the most skilled seers cannot fathom. In places where the power beneath the ground is too strong for even rock to hold, the stone itself becomes molten. Surging up from below, this molten rock--called magma or lava--destroys everything in its path, then gradually calms in the cool air of the surface. Becoming rock again, the magma builds hills, then mountains, around the point where it leaves the ground. In time, these mountains' fiery heads reach to the sky. To what use magicians put the ash and fumes, magma and pumice, and other odd materials is not known by those outside the arts, but the city benefits, and that's what counts.

@@Wastelands
Magical energy and the fecundity of nature permeate the world, but there are regions where the power seems to have ben leached out of the land. Wastelands are not completely useless, but these nearly barren areas give any settlement a tough row to hoe. Life is hard in the wastelands, and few would choose to live there if there were another alternative. Yet many bizarre species of plant and animal seem to thrive in the desolation--species that are of interest to conjurors, alchemists, and others who seek knowledge.

@@Wildlands
Some would say that any land that has not been tamed to agriculture is wild, but those folk have likely never been to a true region of wildlands. Here the energies of magic are disorganized and chaotic, and nature is filled with the cacaphony of diversity. Though they are disorienting at times and disturbing to less hardy souls, the wildlands enjoy a vitality that tamer regions do not share. The source of this vigor is unknown, but a city can take advantage of it--with the right program.

@@Bedrock
If the ground in which we grow our crops is the skin of the earth, then bedrock is its bones. It is said that dwarves and other subterranean burrowers can make passages through the rock, but every tunneling effort spent by other races is doomed to failure. They can dig mines, but making headway through the thick, strong stone is beyond normal mortal capabilities.

@@Coral Reef
Though most surface dwellers do not realize it, coral is not stone. A reef is composed of tiny living animals--many thousands of them--and it derives its hardness from their multitudinous skeletons and shells. As a living community, a coral reef is both a potential source of food for a city and also a fragile, easily damaged ecosystem. Harvesting this particular bounty of nature must be performed carefully, lest the balance of the reef be destroyed and the coral itself killed.

@@Eels
It is unusual for eels to travel in large groups; they do not school as most species of fish do. However, in certain spots, the temperature and the supply of eel food is so reliable that eels congregate there naturally. These areas are breeding grounds for eels, but also fighting arenas for the more aggressive species. Regardless of their reasons for being there, the fact that eels are in good supply makes it possible for a nearby city to benefit from this resource.

@@Fish School
Prevailing winds, ocean currents, and deep water trenches can often combine to produce conditions that are optimum for fish. In areas such as these, offshore winds push the warm surface waters out to deeper waters. Underwater currents push cold, nutrient-rich water from deep below the surface back toward the coast. The high concentration of nutrients in this colder water, caused by decomposition of organic matter at extreme depths, creates an ideal environment for fish and other sea life. Well-fed fish gather in schools, which can number into the thousands or millions of individuals.

@@Granite Vein
Granite is one of the preferred building materials for construction that is meant to stand the test of time. Wood rots or burns and bricks crumble, but stone survives. Most bedrock is a mixture of different types of stone--igneous, sedimentary, and so forth, but one can find the occasional vein of nearly pure, hard granite. These lodes are a prime reason for establishing a city nearby--especially since having an easy source of granite makes it so much easier to build the city in the first place.

@@Ice Cap
Near the coldest regions of the world, even the salt oceans can freeze. The caps of ice that form over the sea can reach astounding depths, even approaching the sea floor in shallower areas. There is little to attract life to these icy zones, and yet somehow, organisms thrive there. The resources are thin under the ice cap, and very little sunlight gets through. Even the hardy Merfolk tend to avoid these regions, and with good reason.

@@Ice Nodule
Even in the cold and nearly desolate polar regions, there are resources to be found. In the process of freezing, sea water loses much of its mineral content. As the ice forms, these minerals tend to drop out and fall toward the bottom. Though they are normally encased in a layer of ice by the time they settle, these nodules are highly useful, because the minerals are quite often in a nearly pure form. The cold conditions make collecting the nodules difficult, but it is a rewarding task.

@@Kelp Forest
When they are not disturbed by violent currents, eaten by swarming schools of migrating fish, or otherwise destroyed by the activites of humankind, kelp plants can grow to enormous size. Groves of these tall organisms reach for the sunlit surface--and sometimes reach it! Spreading rapidly as the years pass, a kelp forest can overwhelm large regions of the sea bed, providing a peaceful home for many species and a beautiful playground for careful swimmers.

@@Krill
It is said that the life of the world depends on the health of the sea. If this is true, then the world depends on krill. These tiny organisms take sustenance only from the sea water and the sun, and they provide the food for all of the smallest creatures, as well as for the giant whales. They are the base of the food pyramid, and without them, the sea would be as barren as its surface suggests. Krill is one of  nature's best sources of food for underwater animals, and it can be processed to supply cities, as well.

@@Lava Bed
This resource was removed, but it's a big pain to renumber all the ones after this, so we left this in the file as a place holder.

@@Lava Vent
Volcanic activity is not limited to the dry surface of the world. In fact, most of the places where lava spews forth from underground are beneath the sea, where the bedrock is less thick than it is on the land continents. Over time, molten rock spreads along the sea floor and cools, but when it first erupts it is extraordinarily hot. Steam bubbles can form in the shallower areas, but where the pressure is too great, the sea water becomes superheated. Very few forms of non-magical life can survive for long in these realms.

@@Mineral Deposit
The sea's magic is not confined to romantic sunsets over the waves and the glorious beauty of the life beneath the surface. On the surface, minerals are found beneath the ground, but underwater, the process of mining is more difficult and dangerous. The sea goddesses and gods long ago took pity on the folk who live under the waves, and they primed the oceans to collect deposits of minerals into convenient little balls. These nodules often lay exposed on the sea floor, ripe for easy collection. They also mark areas where a little mining can tap into buried lodes much like those on the surface.

@@Ocean Depths
There are regions of the deep ocean where even Merfolk fear to tread. These are the Great Deeps, also known as the Ocean Depths. The pressures and the darkness are unimaginably extreme there, and only the bravest Merfolk travel the depths--skimming over them in vessels equivalent to the seagoing ships of the surface cultures. Monsters are said to roam the bottom of these abyssal regions, but none know with certainty save perhaps a few seers.

@@Oyster Bed
The oyster is one of the best known shellfish. Though famous for the smooth pearls created by only a few types, oysters also provide a rich source of food and useful minerals. These bottom dwellers rarely move about, and they tend to congregate in longstanding beds. A bed of oysters might contain hundreds of thousands of individuals of all ages and sizes. These vast plains of shellfish can sustain themselves for hundreds or even thousands of years, if not destroyed by overzealous harvesting or ecological disaster.

@@Sargasso Sea
Sailors recount many a tale of ships mired in seaweed and trapped forever. These stories often end in warnings of a ships' graveyard--a region of tangled wrack that moves from place to place and captures unwary vessels. This area is called a "sargasso" or "sargasso sea" by the mariners. In truth, there are vast areas where the long kelp and other ocean plants reach nearly to the surface and grow so thick that only the most experienced merfolk can pass through without becoming lost. These regions do not, however, wander about the oceans like nomads. They stay put like most forests, and any ship that blunders into their grip is not the victim of magic or the supernatural, but of poor maps and a careless lookout.

@@Sea Bed
The nearer one approaches to the surface, the more sunlight filters through. Though nearly no light reaches the bottom of the ocean except in the shallowest areas, there are regions where the water overhead is less deep. These are called sea "beds" because of the soft layers of sediment that collect here. More sunlight means a greater diversity of life, and when those organisms eventually fall to the bottom, they form a rich loam that is perfect for growing crops. Improvement of this subsea soil is unecessary and in fact would cause more harm than good.

@@Sea Floor
Surface dwellers, looking at the waves, often imagine that the bottom of the sea is a desolate place. Even in the deepest, coldest regions of highest pressure, nothing could be further from the truth. Everything on the surface eventually falls into the sea--rivers drain nutrients from the land, ships drop their cargoes, and so on. The sea floor is a wondrous forest of life, from tiny single-celled organisms to monstrous giants like the Kraken. Only those who cannot breathe beneath the sea believe it is a dead world.

@@Sea Garden
The undersea realm is a palace of natural wonders, and few are more glorious than the sea gardens. It is possible that the gods once had a hand in the creation of these splendid forests of kelp and coral, but the gardens have long since learned to thrive on their own. The rich abundance of these areas seems fragile, but is in fact robust enough to abide decades of exploitation--if the harvesters are careful.

@@Shipwreck
Wooden ships have plied the seas since the earliest days of ocean travel, and from the very beginning, the creatures of the sea have dragged them down to their doom. Storms contribute their share, so that the ocean floor might be said to be littered with the broken hulks of vessels. Wrecks provide secure homes for many creatures, and they bring the wealth of the surface to the sea floor. Products and crops not otherwise available in the ocean depths are often found, sealed in watertight containers, in the holds of a merchant ship on the bottom. Though the cargo that can be salvaged is of course limited, much of it is quickly hidden beneath the silty sands, and digging often uncovers whole new decks to explore and exploit.

@@Smoker
There are places beneath the sea where lava sprites are imprisoned. No one knows for certain how they got there, but most agree that these creatures must have angered a god at some time in the past. Whatever the case, they're angry, and their rage heats the rock and water all around them, causing hot mud to steam up into the ocean depths. These quickly fill with roiling, hot, black silted water, which is why they're called smokers. The spewing hot muddy water brings plenty of nutrients and energy into the surrounding sea, and whatever life can suvive the temperature thrives.

@@Sulfides
Sulphur is one of the moderately magical elements. It is quite common in the sediment that settles to the sea bottom, and often mixes with other substances. Though pure sulphur is most useful, these mixtures, called sulfides, can be a source of the pure element if they're handled correctly. It takes very little processing to extract the sulphur from the sulfides, but many of the by-products are poisonous and lightweight--they mix quickly with air, but are harmlessly re-dissolved when exposed to seawater. Thus, the water breathing races are more likely to process sulfides and put them to use, especially in undersea cities.

@@Trench
The deepest parts of any ocean are the trenches. Formed by geologic processes that have been going on since before even the gods existed, these nearly bottomless chasms frequently remain unexplored. The pressures at the great depths are such that no living thing can survive without the aid of powerful magic. Who knows what oddities, dangers, and perhaps treasures might lie at the bottoms of these deepest, darkest pits in the undersea world.

@@Bat Cavern
Bats are one of the most common and numerous inhabitants of the underground world. When not actively hunting, these normally harmless creatures tend to congregate in large caverns, often returning to the same spot day after day. Some of these caverns are home to hundreds of thousands of bats, all of which huddle together throughout the day. When startled by noise or bright light, the bat population of a cavern can all launch from their perches in a swarm. Their echolocation sense allows them to avoid collisions with each other, but that's no help to the poor soul who woke them up.

@@Blue Room
Clay is one of the most common minerals in the world, and it is just as easily found underground as it is on the surface. Clays come in many colors, and though surface races cannot see color underground without the aid of lights, the folk that dwell down there can see quite well. Golbins are especially fond of blue clays, and will often smear a layer of this mineral on the walls of the chambers they frequent. Some of these clays contain sparkling bits and glowing blue algae, which make them all the more attractive to goblin decorators.

@@Cave Fish
It might surprise a surface dweller to learn that there are species of fish that thrive underground. A little thought dispels the shock, however. The depths of the sea are the same regardless of what is above them--sky or rock. The main difference is that even shallow water fish who live near the surface have light-producing organs--bioluminescence--like the denizens of the inky depths of surface oceans. Cave fish are perfectly edible, although surface races often get sick if the dish is not prepared correctly.

@@Cave of Wonders
It is written in the ancient that many types of dragons live under the ground. Their subterranean lairs are said to be lined with gems and gold and the spoils of centuries of life. If any of this is true, then a cave such as this would be a wonder indeed--a nearly inexhaustible supply of riches.

@@Diamonds
Perhaps the most valuable gem of all is the diamond. This hardest of stones is a highly regarded trade commodity both for its rarity and beauty and because it has certain uses in magical efforts. Legend has it that all the diamonds in the world were originally created long ago by a powerful dwarven wizard--who perished in the casting. These gems are sometimes found on the surface, but more often mining is required to find the truly spectacular stones and large deposits.

@@Fire Chamber
Despite the best efforts of the eternal ice wraiths, the fire spirits sometimes manage to escape their prison in the earth and reach the underground world or even the surface. Fire spirits are not very intelligent, but there are a few with wisdom among them, and those few do not run wild on escaping. Rather, they set to work eroding the ice wraiths' control--setting up fire chambers to rival the magical power of the Floes' ice chambers. Each chamber is a battle in an eons-long war that the mortal races cannot affect.

@@Fire Spout
The eternal war between the fire spirits and the ice wraiths takes place in battles so slow that mortals are seldom aware of them. A fire spout is one of the rare pieces of evidence that the war is actively fought. When the Floes catch a fire spirit in the act of trying to escape from its imprisonment in the center of the earth, they suppress it with powerful magic. The spirit, of course, seeks to fight free to the surface. The result is a fire spout, which is the physical manifestation of the fire spirit struggling upward against the bonds imposed by the ice wraiths.

@@Fungal Groves
In the surface world, fungi are confined to the dark, damp places, and thus do not often grow to any appreciable size. Underground, every place is dark and damp, so a fungus can thrive. In areas that are not often disturbed, where there is a reliable source of nutrients, the fungi establish themselves with a vengeance, creating succulent groves filled with giant growths. These regions are like oases in a desert of rock, and the cities of the dark world treasure the fungal groves and protect them with careful tending and ecological maintenance.

@@Gems
Gemstones, treasured throughout time for their beauty and value, have always been a sought-after commodity. Gems are especially coveted, for reason unknown to humankind, by the denizens of the underground lands. Some of the most notable gem deposits have been found beneath ancient cities. The ruins of dead civilizations have sometimes been found to hide large quantities of precious and semi-precious gems, as well as gold and other items of value.

@@Gilt Sword
Many foolish adventurers seek their destiny and their fortune in the mysterious caverns of the underground world. All but the most fortunate meet their fate as unremarked corpses decorating the stone wall of some anonymous tunnel. Weapons do not rot as quickly as bodies (and they are far less inviting to hungry vermin), so that one often finds discarded swords in odd locations. The fact that foolishness and rich parents seem to be common traits of adveturous youths accounts for the notable fact that the great majority of these swords are decorated with gilt.

@@Green Slime
The inhabitants of the subterranean world have no aversion to slime; it's a common part of their everyday lives. Most slime is generated by living things--molds, fungi, and other tiny beings--and is thus a potential source of food. (When you live in the dark under tons of rock, you'll eat what you can get.) Green slime grows only where tiny crevices allow some sunlight to intrude on the darkness, allowing green organisms to grow. (Sages tell us that a certain magic in sunlight is necessary for the color of green plants.) Green slime is considered a delicacy by the Goblins, poison by the Deeper Troglodytes, and a slippery nuisance by Humans.

@@Guano
Bats are one of the most numerous inhabitants of any subterranean area. When not actively hunting, these normally harmless creatures tend to congregate on the ceilings of large caverns, often returning to the same spot day after day. The cave floors in these nesting sites quickly become covered with a thick layer of guano--bat droppings. Despite its unattractive origin, this substance is valuable both as fertilizer for underground crops and as a vital component of several spells and chemical processes.

@@Ice Chamber
The deeper into the earth you travel, the warmer it gets. Mages say that the domain of the fire and volcano spirits is beneath the underworld, and that the heat would certainly overcome any traveler foolhardy enough to attempt to reach it. The fire spirits would gladly erupt onto the surface and destroy everything there, were it not for the efforts of the ancient, slow, and calm race of Floes. These ice wraiths long ago established areas of cold--ice chambers--in magically strategic locations throughout the underground world. The network of ice they maintain prevents the fire spirits from escaping, except near the occasional volcano.

@@Inky Pool
Water is not uncommon underground, but these pools are not filled with normal water. In fact, no one knows precisely what is in an inky pool. It's dark, viscous, and has no discernable odor. It flows like water and does no harm to creatures forced to drink it. Yet, wizards collect the fluid from inky pools in tiny vials, which they rush back to their sanctuaries. They refuse to discuss it, so that this might be one magical mystery that is never revealed.

@@Limestone
The majority of the large and complex cave systems in the subterranean world were formed by the action of water. Limestone is a type of rock that, compared to other rock, is easily dissolved and worn away. Over centuries, a layer of limestone can be partially removed by water and shaped into caverns, stalagtites, stalagmites, and other intriguing natural formations. Alchemists tell us that limestone is similar in composition to bone, and some believe that limestone deposits are the ancient bones of long dead gods and giants.

@@Plesiosaur
Sages tell us that long, long ago, giant reptiles walked the land and were the dominant race in Midgard. While many folks find that difficult to believe, one look at the Plesiosaur can change even the most stubbornly held opinion. These huge sea creatures are said to be a relic of that long forgotten era. Though they seem to eat only plants, their massive size makes them a danger to shipping. Plesiosaur hunting is a risky but highly profitable business.

@@Slime Cave
This is not a pleasant place for a human, but the inhabitants of the subterranean world have no aversion to slime; it's a common part of their everyday lives. Most slime is generated by living things--molds, fungi, and other tiny beings--and is thus a potential source of food. When you live in the dark under tons of rock, you'll eat what you can get. Some speculate that their diet is one of the reasons goblins, trolls, and other underground creatures have such vile tempers.

@@Tunnel
Everyone is familiar with the tunnels dug by rabbits and other animals, but these are for the most part larger burrows created by more unpleasnt subterranean creatures. Some tunnels are also bored by volcanic activity, then left empty when the magma subsides or moves on. Though the original inhabitants of any tunnel--creatures or magma--are most likely long gone, these passages are still no place for civilizaed beings. Heavily tunneled regions are also quite low in productivity.

@@Vaulted Sea
Grand and wonderful to see, these are bodies of water trapped beneath the earth, which by centuries of erosion have carved places for themselves under great vaulted stone ceilings. Though awe-inspiring, these underground seas are also dangerous. The forces that cause tides reach even to these dark depths. When a tide rises on the surface, it is spread over a large area. Tides in a captive sea, however, are confined--and therefore much more intense. Woe be to the poor soul caught on the subterranean beach when high tide comes.

@@Cyclone
This is yet another natural phenomenon that the gods have often used as their tool. Normally, a cyclone is generated when hot air--which wants to rise--becomes trapped beneath a layer of colder air. The hot air takes advantage of any weakness or thin spot in the oppressing cold air, and it makes its escape quickly and violently. Where the hot air rises through a tiny hole in the layer of cold air, it spins like water going down a drain, and the result is a cyclone--one of the most dangerous and unpredictable bits of weather known.

@@Eye
In the center of the most violent storms, there is often a small area of absolute calm. This is the legendary "eye of the storm" that magicians speak of. It is said that certain powerful spells, when incanted in the eye, have wondrous and far-reaching effects. Some magic is said to work only when performed in the eye of a terrible storm. The risks are great, but many wizards are willing to venture it. After all, magic itself is risky enough, what's one more danger?

@@Heat Lightning
Surface dwellers claim that there is no such thing as heat lightning. They believe that it is simply a mispronunciation of "sheet lightning," the name for flashes of light from a far-off storm that have been refracted into a broad sheet. Those who have traveled the skies, however, know the truth. Flying over deserts and similar areas of intense heat, the lightning sprites become argumentative and angry, as anyone does in an uncomfortable heat. This often leads to fights between the sprites, and the unavoidable conclusion is a duel of bolts. Seen from afar, the duel resembles normal lightning.

@@Hurricane
A hurricane is the same thing as a typhoon, with the exception of its location. What the people of one region call a hurricane, those of another area name a typhoon. From above, they're pretty much all the same--unpredicatble circular wind patterns covering several hundred square miles and a calm center a few tens of miles across. The destruction these storms cause on the surface is extraordinary, but from far enough up in the sky, a hurricane is little more than an interesting feature of the cloudscape.

@@Magic Cloud
Some clouds, for reasons that remain unknown to this day, are sparkling well-springs of magical power. Some say that these magic clouds were once the homes of gods, and that a residue of god-power remains in them. Some claim that swarms of tiny, invisible sprites constantly charge the clouds through their energetic flight. Though they do not really know where the power comes from, magicians are more than happy to use it.

@@Magic Node
Even high above the ground, concentrations of ley energy have effects. Where lines of this powerful magic force interact, they set up a "jet" effect that sprays mystical energies high into the air. When the spray slows enough (through the natural magic resistance of the aerial realm), it becomes visible and settles in place to create a magic node. These nodes are like hot springs, providing a long lasting natural source of magic power.

@@Northern Lights
Alchemists tell us that the sun is a giant ball of fire, and that it sends "electrically charged particles" toward the world in a constant hail. When these magical "ions" strike the world's own "magnetic field"--a kind of magical protective garment--the field forces the ions to the north and south, away from inhabited lands. There, the ions are collected in an aerial version of a ley line, which is useful to users of magic, though a bit dangerous. The ions fight their captivity, of course, which results in the wavering, diaphanous beauty of the display. The surface dwellers, of course, have mistaken this perfectly natural magical phenomenon for a goddess, and named her Aurora.

@@Ozone Hole
Though the sun is the source of all light and life, not all of his gifts are without harmful potential. Recognizing this, the early gods long ago covered the world with a thin protective layer of ozone. This screen does not prevent the sun's curse from reaching the ground, for the sun is more powerful than earthly gods. However, it absorbs some of the harm. The spell is growing old now, and holes have begun to appear in the protective layer. It remains to be seen how long this magic will last, and what the new gods intend to do about it.

@@Sky
The sky above is home to an amazing array of creatures, including the Buteos, a race that has been inaccurately described as flying men. Though some unsophisticated seers hold that the ancient gods live in the sky, the more knowledgable oracles know that the sky is, in fact, a god in its own right. Because no god would allow other gods to live inside it for very long, we know that the rest of the gods must inhabit some place other than the sky. Without wings or some sort of flight spell, no creature can traverse the sky on its own power.

@@Storm Cloud
Storms are an everyday feature of the weather on the surface, and the piled up clouds that cause them are easily visible from above. Certain geographical features cause regular storm fronts. For example, when mountains sit to the east of a sea, wet, warm air blowing inland is forced upward by the peaks. In rising, the air loses its ability to hold the moisture, and it rains down on the ridges and hills to the west of the mountains. Of course, even these terrain related stormy areas are not as long lasting and stable as those the gods create.

@@Thunderhead
One way you can tell from above that a major storm is scouring the countryside below is the thunderhead. These monumentally high, dark clouds resemble giant anvils in the air, and they normally dump torrential rains on the land. Some thunderheads are the natural result of stormy weather, but those are not as long lasting and stable as those the gods create. Pity the region that a god sees fit to curse with permanent darkness and rain.

@@Typhoon
A typhoon is the same thing as a hurricane, with the exception of its location. What the people of one region call a hurricane, those of another area name a typhoon. From above, they're pretty much all the same--unpredicatble circular wind patterns covering several hundred square miles and a calm center a few tens of miles across. The destruction these storms cause on the surface is extraordinary, but from far enough up in the sky, a typhoon is little more than an interesting feature of the cloudscape.

@@Updraft
An updraft forms where the land below heats the air or a mountain forces it upward, causing it to rise. This regular wind sometimes carries lightweight things up from the surface into the clouds. Most of these objects are not magical, and they fall back to earth even more quickly then they rose from it. Wind fishermen from a nearby city come out each day with their specially prepared nets to capture as much of this material as possible. Magical items tend to float where they escape the updraft, and these valuable objects are easier to gather.

@@Whirlwind
Like an updraft, but many times more powerful and quite dangerous, a whirlwind brings objects from the surface and deposits them in the clouds. Most of this detritus is, of course, not magical, and it falls back to earth as soon as it is free of the wind. Harvesters from a nearby city waiting near the whirlwind can often catch much of it in nets. Magical items tend to float where they are released, and consequently are a bit easier to gather.

@@White Cloud
As you have no doubt noticed, most clouds are white. Generally, this is true of any cloud that isn't involved in a storm. From low, fluffy cumulus water vapor clouds on up through the high, wispy cirrostratus ice clouds, white is the predominant color. When traveling magically in the sky, white is the color of safety and stable air masses. If you stick to these clouds, you can't go wrong.

@@Mantlerock
Between the huge molten core that inhabits the center of its interior and its surface crust of soil and broken rock, Midgard possesses many layers of rock of varying density. Elsewhere, we have mentioned Bedrock which exists just below the surface. Its rock is permeable and receptive to mining and tunneling. Below it, lies the Mantlerock. This band of denser rock forms the basins of all of the world's oceans and seas. It is impervious to axe or shovel and forms impenetrable barriers to the passage of anyone or anything except those learned in magical transportation.

@GOVERNMENT_DESCRIPTIONS
;
@@GOVERNMENT_INDEX
0,			; Anarchy
1,			; Despotism
5,			; Monarchy
2,			; Commune
4,			; Fanaticism
6,			; Althing
3,			; Greatlaw
-2,			; MUST BE HERE! TERMINATOR!

@@Anarchy
Anarchy represents not so much a government type as the lack of any stable government. Anarchy occurs when your civilization's government falls, or when you decide to have a Revolution. After a few turns of Anarchy, you can rebuild a new government. Anarchy is similar to Despotism, except that the corruption rate is VERY HIGH. However, no taxes are collected during a period of Anarchy, and no scientific research is conducted.

@@Despotism	
In a Despotism, the ruler has absolute control over his or her subjects, and this control is usually enforced by the military. This system has a tendency to minimize individual freedom, and reduce the efficiency of production efforts. 

* Each unit above the city size costs one Shield per turn.
* Settlers eat one Food per turn.

Up to three military units in each city institute "martial law". Each of these units makes one unhappy citizen content.

Despotism has a high rate of corruption and waste. The farther a city is from your capital, the higher its level of corruption.

* Under a Despotism, Tax/Luxury/Magic rates cannot be set higher than 60%.
* Any terrain square that ordinarily produces three or more of any resource (Food, Shields, or Trade) produces one less.
* Because of Despotism's high rate of corruption, it is almost always an inferior form of government. Try to switch to a Monarchy as soon as possible.

@@Commune
A Communal government is ruled by a coordinating committee, which in turn is overseen by the chairman.  In a true Communal system, all property is owned collectively by the people, and labor is organized to be equally advantageous to all people. This ideal has never truly been realized, however, and the "Communal" governments of the world are usually much different.

* Each unit beyond the third unit costs one shield per turn.
* Settler units require TWO Food per turn.

Up to three military units stationed in each city help maintain order, making TWO unhappy citizens (per unit) content.

In the Commune state control of the economy eliminates organized crime. Your cities, therefore, experience no corruption.

* All espionage units produced under Communal governments are Veterans.
* In the Commune, none of the tax rates (magic, taxes, and luxuries) may be set higher than 80%.

* The Commune is best for large, far-flung empires that need to maintain a large military.
* Use your powerful spies to steal technology.

@@Greatlaw
The ruler of a Greatlaw state is elected by the people. The rulings of this leader are subject to review by the Senate, a group of representatives who serve the best interests of the citizens. The Greatlaw affords all citizens a higher degree of personal freedom and involvement than any other form of government.

* Each unit costs one shield per turn.
* Settler units require TWO Food per turn.

Each unit which is not in a friendly city or a fortress within 3 spaces of a friendly city causes two citizens in its home city to become unhappy.

Under the Greatlaw, cities experience no inaccuracy or waste.

* There are no limits on the tax rate settings (magic, taxes, and luxuries).
* Under the Greatlaw, each terrain square that ordinarily produces at least one unit of trade produces an extra unit.
* The units and cities of a Greatlaw state are immune to bribery.
* Your Senate may force a peaceful solution in a conflict.

* Greatlaw states can produce spectacular amounts of revenue and scientific research.  However, because of the severe happiness restrictions on military units, this form of government tends to be viable only for large, advanced civilizations.
* Increasing your luxuries rate and building Wonders can help alleviate this problem.

@@Fanaticism
Fanaticism is a form of government organized around a central set of beliefs. These beliefs, usually religious in nature, form a rigid guideline for the actions and reactions of both the ruler and the people. In a Fanatic society, the people and the rulers are entirely devoted to their beliefs, and are usually willing to die to preserve them.

* Each unit beyond the eighth unit costs one Shield per turn (except Trolls, which never require maintenance).
* Settlers eat two Food per turn.

Under Fanaticism, no citizen is ever unhappy!

Fanaticism has a very low rate of corruption.

* Under Fanaticism, Tax/Luxury/Magic rates cannot be set higher than 80%.
* Under Fanaticism, all Magic production is HALVED.
* Improvements that normally convert unhappy citizens to content citizens produce "tithes" (money) equivalent to the number of people they would normally convert, and require no maintenance.
* The diplomatic penalties for terrorist acts committed by diplomatic and espionage units is reduced.

* Fanaticism eliminates all happiness problems and provides excellent revenue, although research tends to languish.

@@Monarchy
A Monarchy is ruled by a single person, known as a monarch. The monarch's rule is less absolute than that of a despot, and he or she usually has the acceptance of at least the upper-class. The aristocrats under this system of government have some economic freedom, allowing the civilization to be more productive. 

* Each unit beyond the third unit costs one Shield per turn.
* Settlers eat one Food per turn.

Up to three military units in each city institute "martial law". Each of these units makes one unhappy citizen content.

Monarchy has a moderate rate of corruption and waste. The farther a city is from your capital, the higher its level of corruption.

* Under a Monarchy, Tax/Luxury/Magic rates cannot be set higher than 70%.

* Monarchy is an excellent form of government for a young civilization.

@@Althing
The Althing is a periodic gathering of the leaders of every clan and settlement in the grand house of the overlord. Although the overlord's government has the ultimate say in matters that affect the society as a whole, the clans have a certain amount of latitude in the governing of local affairs. Decisions are made by the ruler, but are subject to review by a group of officials known as the Senate.

* Each unit costs one shield per turn.
* Settlers eat two Food per turn.

Each unit beyond the first unit that is not in a friendly city (or in a Fortress within three squares of a friendly city) causes one citizen in its home city to become unhappy.

Althing states experience a low rate of corruption and waste. The farther a city is from your capital, the higher its level of corruption.

* Under the Althing, Tax/Luxury/Magic rates cannot be set higher than 80%.
* Your senate may force a peaceful solution in a conflict.

* Switching to the Althing can give an astounding boost to your Magic and Luxury revenues, although you will probably be forced to shift some Trade to Luxuries in order to prevent unhappiness.
* The Althing makes it difficult and expensive to keep a sizable army in the field, but building certain Improvements and Wonders can help to alleviate this problem.

@CONCEPT_DESCRIPTIONS

@@Brief Background
In Norse mythology, the world was divided into nine planes of existence, ranging from the dwarven region deep underground to the celestial plane of Asgard, the home of the gods. These planes were supported by the branches and roots of the giant tree, Yggdrasil. Here Odin, the chief Norse god, hanged himself for nine days in order to learn wisdom. Midgard was only one of these planes, the one where Norsemen lived on the surface of the earth. Other mythical creatures like the dwarves, dragons, and goblins lived on the other planes and would often visit or even transplant themselves into the Norseman's world.
We have borrowed some of this mythology as the framework for both the fantasy and Midgard games. We have also invented much of it, too. We never intended to create a facsimile of these myths but only those parts we felt enhanced the fantasy element of play.
In our games, Midgard represents the whole world and not just one plane of it. We have reduced the number of planes from nine to four, the surface world, undersea world, underground world, and cloud world.
You may choose any of seven races to play:
Humans, our ancestors, who prefer to live on the surface world,
Infidels, wild nomadic warrior race, who also prefer to live on the surface world,
Elves, the creatures of the forest, a third race who prefer to live on the surface world
Buteos, the eagle people, who'd rather live on the cloud world
Merfolk, the sea race, who are most at home underwater
Goblins, nasty creatures of caves and mines, who prefer to live in the underworld
Stygians, the undead race, who also are happiest in the underworld
Although some races might find it difficult to found productive cities on other planes. All races can build prosperous cities on the surface world. Many creatures can travel between some of these planes, a few can travel between all of the planes, and some are stuck on the plane where they are created. We have provided a units.xls file in the game directory that explains unit capabilities in more detail. You will need Excel or an Excel reader, though, to read it. If you see a creature's health bar turn green around the border that is a signal that it can travel to at least one other world from where it stands. Hit the 'n' hot key to make the move.
Unlike the original Civilization II, all of the games in this package have events that impact play. Don't be surprised if dragons suddenly appear out of nowhere to attack your cities or a dwarf king chooses to join your side. It's all in the spirit of these dangerous times. You will hear stories and rumors of great quests from time to time. Pay attention to what is said and try to complete as many as you can. They will help you win. Some quests have a warning attached and may activate unpleasant results. You should undertake one of these only if in desparate straits. 
Recall that you have four ways to win.
Conquer the world.
Be the first to build and launch the Great Siege Engine
Complete all of the quests.
Find Bifrost, the rainbow bridge.

@@Corrosion
Overuse of magic, especially for everyday purposes like industry, weakens the fabric of the ubiquitous magical energy that holds our land and our existence together. If this sort of exploitation becomes bad enough, pinholes and even larger gaps can appear in the weave of the world. Workers in high magic call areas that are rife with these holes "magical corrosion" regions. When an area is corroded, it is as if a curse had fallen over the land; it produces little or nothing.

Corrosion can be purged and the land energy renewed by moving settler-type units into the corroded square and pressing the "P" key, or choosing the "Clean Up Corrosion" command from the Orders menu. A city's potential for causing corrosion can be reduced through the construction of certain City Improvements or by reducing the city's production.

@@City Squares
The resources used by a city are not only generated in the squares surrounding the city: they are also generated by the city square itself. The city square generates all the resources normally produced by the Terrain type on which the city is built. In addition, the Terrain square occupied by the city is improved to the maximum extent possible. The city square automatically contains a road, which is upgraded to a railroad when the requisite advance is discovered. The city square is also automatically irrigated or mined, depending on the type of terrain. Finally, if the city is built on terrain that normally produces no shields, one shield is automatically added to the other resources generated in the city square. These enhancements ensure that the city square produces the maximum amount of resources possible.

@@Combat Damage
It is possible for units to be damaged (and survive) as a result of combat. In each successful attack, a unit inflicts an amount of damage equal to its Firepower rating. The amount of damage a unit can sustain before it is destroyed is determined by multiplying the unit's Hit Point rating by ten.

The approximate amount of damage a unit has sustained can be determined by the length and color of the unit's damage bar (the colored bar near the unit). A green bar indicates that the unit has lost from 0 to 33 percent of its Hit Points, a yellow bar shows that the unit has lost from 34 to 66 percent, and a red bar indicates that it has lost 67 percent or more.

Damage also affects the movement of a unit. The percentage of movement lost is equivalent to the percentage of Hit Points lost. Naval units can never have their movement reduced below two. The movement of air units is not affected by damage.

@@Irrigation
When the early farmers moved down from the hills into the valleys of the world's great rivers, they had to develop the technology of irrigation. The freshwater rivers passed through lands essentially barren due to the lack of rainfall. Through irrigation, water could be removed from the rivers and spread on the nearby land, making it suitable for farming.

Irrigation increases Food production in most types of terrain. Only squares vertically or horizontally adjacent to an ocean, a river, or another irrigated square can be irrigated. After the discovery of Dragon's Teeth, terrain squares can be double-irrigated to create Settled Lands. Order any settler-type unit to irrigate by pressing the "I" key or selecting "Build Irrigation" from the Orders menu.

@@Trade
Trade represents more than just the exchange of goods and cash between cities and civilizations. Trade also represents the exchange of knowledge and ideas, and the recreational travel and activities of the citizens of your civilization. The total amount of Trade produced by each city is represented in the Resource Chart of the City Display. Trade is then broken down into three separate components: Taxes, Luxuries, and Magic. The amount of Trade allocated to each of these areas is controlled by selecting the "Change Tax Rate" option on the Kingdom menu.

Trade can be increased through the construction of certain City Improvements and Wonders of the World. It can also be increased through terrain improvements, and through the establishment of trade routes.

@@Disband
When a friendly unit becomes obsolete, costs too much to maintain, or causes unhappiness among your population, you might want to eliminate the unit. To do so, order it to disband by holding down the shift key and pressing "D", or by selecting "Disband" from the Orders menu. Once disbanded, the unit is permanently removed from the game.

When a unit is disbanded inside a friendly city, half of the unit's production cost is added to the production of whatever unit, improvement, or Wonder is currently under production in the city.

Note that some units resist being forced to disband.

@@Luxuries
The provision of Luxuries for your citizens is indicated in the City Display. Each two Luxuries make one content citizen happy or one unhappy citizen content. The amount of Luxuries a city produces is mainly determined by the percentage of Trade you have allocated to Luxuries. This can be adjusted using the "Change Tax Rate" command on the Kingdom menu. A city's Luxuries can also be increased by building certain City Improvements and Wonders of the World, and by converting citizens into Entertainers.

@@Fortress
Once your civilization has discovered Megalithic Tombs, settlers have the ability to construct fortresses. Fortresses can be used to defend city perimeters and to block key points of access from enemy armies. A properly manned fortress can provide an effective defense by doubling the defensive strength of all units stationed within. Unlike in normal combat, units stacked within a fortress defend and are destroyed one at a time in battle, rather than being destroyed simultaneously. Fortresses themselves do not suffer damage in the attack.

You can have your settlers construct fortresses by pressing the "F" key or choosing the Build Fortress command from the Orders menu. Units within a fortress have their defensive strengths doubled. Under the Althing, units stationed inside fortresses built within three squares of their home city do not cause unhappiness.

@@Fortify
Roman legions on campaign halted their march early enough each evening to build a completely fortified camp for the night. They had learned the value of defensive fortifications when under attack. Where possible, it is the standard practice of most armies to build defensive works of some type whenever expecting an attack. Fortified defenders have their fighting strength multiplied, making it much harder to defeat them.

Ground units can be ordered to fortify by pressing the "F" key, or by selecting "Fortify" from the Orders menu. The defensive value of fortified units is increased by 50 percent.

@@Jormungand's Mouth
Jormungand, also called Jormungandr and Iormungandr, is a giant serpent whose body circles the entire world of Midgard. This serpent is the child of Loki and Angerboda, and it is destined to be killed by and to kill Thor at Ragnarok. Jormungand holds its tail in its mouth, and legend has it that any explorer who is brave and hardy enough can climb into the mouth of the serpent without being bitten. Entering the throat of the great serpent, it is told, leads the explorer to another world.

@@Impassable Terrain
Before the discovery of primitive boats, any deep enough body of water was an insurmountable barrier to travel. Mountain chains, canyons, and other natural obstacles were all at one time considered impassable--until someone figured out a way to get through. Over the course of time, you might encounter terrain that your units cannot enter; this is "impassable" terrain. Air units can travel over impassable terrain without trouble, but most naval and ground units cannot enter these areas at all. The only exceptions are those units with the specific ability to cross impassable terrain.

@@Corruption and Waste
As your civilization grows, you might notice that some of your cities are losing some of their Trade and Shields to corruption and waste. Corruption is Trade income that is lost to theft, embezzlement, and other illegal practices. Waste is Shield production that is lost to inefficiency. The farther a city is from your capital, the more corruption and waste it experiences. The amount of corruption and waste is also affected by the system of government you are using.

Corruption and waste, if left unchecked, can significantly slow the development of your civilization. Both corruption and waste can be reduced by 50 percent by building a King's Court in the city experiencing the problem. The best solution, however, is to switch your system of government to a more advanced form. The more advanced the government, the less corruption and waste you experience. Commune and Greatlaw alleviate this problem altogether.

@@Invisible Until Combat
In nature, many organisms have evolved methods of concealing themselves. This natural camouflage serves both to hide prey from potential predators and to conceal predators from potential prey. Military units throughout history have taken a lesson from nature and used camouflage of various forms to conceal themselves until they choose to engage in battle. In your efforts to build your civilization, you're quite likely to encounter units, both natural and artificial, that have the ability to remain unseen until they engage in combat. For convenience, all of these units are referred to as "Invisible Until Combat".

@@Shields
The production of raw materials by your cities is represented by shield icons. Thus, raw materials are commonly referred to as "Shields". The number of Shields produced by each city is displayed in the City Display. Shields are used to support units. Each unit might, depending on government type and other circumstances, require that its home city expend one Shield per turn to support the unit. Excess Shields not used to support units are used for the production of City Improvements, Wonders of the World, and new units.

Shield production largely depends on the type of terrain surrounding the city. In most circumstances, Shield production of a city can be increased through the construction of certain Improvements and Wonders. The construction of mines also improves Shield production in certain types of terrain.

@@Native Transport
Certain units have the ability to move between worlds on their own power. This attribute is referred to as a "Native Transport" ability. Any unit with this sort of power can jaunt from one world to another--within the limits of what worlds it can reach and exist on--without expending any movement points at all. There is a constraint, however. A unit may transport between worlds only at locations where the terrain in the corresponding location on the destination map is of the same domain--land or sea. That is, a naval unit may not transport onto land, and a ground unit may not transport into a sea. Note that this ability is based strictly on the domain of the terrain.

@@Pillage
The terrain improvements built by other civilizations (irrigation, mines, roads, etc.) can be destroyed by moving a unit into the improved terrain square and ordering the unit to pillage. This reduces the production value of the land, and forces your enemy to re-develop the terrain.

Units can be ordered to pillage by holding down the shift key and pressing "P", or by choosing the "Pillage" command from the Orders menu. The unit must be ordered to pillage once for each of the terrain improvements you want to destroy. A fully developed terrain square (settled lands with a railroad, for example) must be pillaged four times in order to remove all improvements.

@@Gates to Hel
The land of the dead is called by many names, but there are only two ways for mortals to get there. The route most commonly taken, of course, is to die. Legend holds that there is an alternative, for those rare heros who choose to enter Hel with their bodies intact. Not everyone who tries succeeds in passing through one of the Gates to Hel. Those who do often wish that they had not.

@@Mining
Early civilizations had little difficulty locating nearly pure deposits of useful metals, such as gold, silver, and copper, lying exposed on the surface. As time passed, the surface deposits were exhausted, and people began digging into the ground to look for more. Mining and excavation for metals and other valuable materials continues today.

Mining increases the Shield production of many types of terrain. Settlers can be ordered to dig mines by pressing the "M" key, or by choosing the "Build Mine" command from the Orders menu.

@@Roads
A network of good quality roads improves travel between cities. Roads are important to every civilization for trade and the movement of troops. As technology grows, improved roads become possible. Modern, paved roads are passable in almost any type of weather, and can be traversed much more quickly than early dirt roads.

To have a settler-type unit build a road, press the "R" key or select the "Build Road" command from the Orders menu. Roads can be built on almost any ground terrain (not at sea). However, they cannot be safely built over a river square until you have acquired the necessary technology to do so. Units moving along roads expend only one third of a movement point per square, regardless of terrain type. Roads also increase the amount of Trade produced by Deserts, Plains, Grasslands, and any natural resource that already generates trade.


@@Magic
The amount of magic study contributed by a city is indicated by icons shown in the City Display. At the start of each turn, the magical output of each city is added to the research project currently in progress, eventually resulting in the discovery of a new Civilization Advance. The more magic study undertaken by each city, the faster new Advances are discovered. The amount of magic produced by your civilization is primarily determined by the amount of incoming Trade you have allocated to magic divination. This percentage can be adjusted by selecting the "Change Tax Rate" command on the Kingdom menu.

The magical output of individual cities and your civilization as a whole can also be increased by building certain City Improvements and Wonders of the World, or by converting citizens into Magicians.

@@Sentry
Units ordered to go on sentry duty appear as gray silhouettes. These units are removed from the movement queue, and remain on sentry duty until another unit moves into their sight range or until they are manually reactivated. Units on sentry duty inside a city are automatically loaded onto ships (up to the ship's unit carrying capacity) when the ship leaves the city.

Units are placed on sentry duty by pressing the "S" key, or by choosing the "Sentry" option on the Orders menu. Damaged units placed on sentry inside a city become active when they have been completely repaired.

@@Ley Lines
Once their mystical researchers have discovered how, any civilization can create great rivers of magical force called Ley Lines. Though this stream of magic cannot be tapped for the casting of major spells, it is of great use in other ways. Units moving along a Ley Line expend no movement points; they are carried along by the mystical current. Ley Lines also make minor magicks (the kind practiced by most itinerant craftspeople) easier, thus they increase Shield and Trade production by 50 percent (rounded down).

Settler units can build Ley Lines. Move the unit onto terrain containing a road, then press the "R" key or select the "Build Ley Line" command from the Orders menu.

@@Specialists
The citizen icons displayed in the Population Roster of the City Display represent the city's work force. Each citizen added to the roster is automatically put to work developing one of the terrain squares within the city radius. In certain situations, it might become necessary to remove a citizen from terrain production in order to perform a specific task. Citizens so removed are called specialists. There are three types of specialist, each of which increases one of the three components of Trade produced by a city. Jesters/Troubadours increase Luxuries, Taxmen increase income (taxes), and Magicians increase Magic production.

To create a specialist, click on any producing square in the City Map. The production icons disappear from the square, and a Jester appears in the Population Roster. To create a Taxman, click the Jester icon once. To create a Magician, first create a Taxman, then click the Taxman icon once. Cities must be size five or larger to support Taxmen and Magicians.

@@Tunnel Entrance
Everyone is familiar with tunnels, but what many people do not know is that the strange races that live underground sometimes build tunnels to connect their world with the surface. Adventurers must be wary, lest they unknowingly enter one of these fell passages and enter an unfamiliar and dangerous land beneath the ground. Lacking the proper equipment and training, most units cannot traverse these tunnels.

@@Taxes
The Taxes collected by a city are indicated by gold icons in the City Display. Taxes are used primarily to pay the maintenance cost of City Improvements each turn. Any tax revenues not used for maintenance of Improvements are added to your treasury. The amount of Taxes generated by the city is primarily determined by the amount of incoming Trade you have allocated to Taxes. This can be adjusted by selecting the "Change Tax Rate" option from the Kingdom menu.

Tax revenues can also be increased through the construction of certain City Improvements and Wonders of the World, or by converting citizens into Taxmen.

@@Elevated Platforms
When research successes allow, settlers gain the ability to construct Elevated Platforms. These structures act as remote landing points and magically protected, safe retreats for flying units of all kinds. Strategically placed Elevated Platforms effectively extend the range of these units, allowing them to operate farther from friendly cities.

To build an Elevated Platform, choose the command from the Orders menu or press the "e" key.

@@Magical Jump
After the discovery of the Warp Spell, you have the ability to perform Magical Jumps between your cities. Jumping allows you to move units instantly over great distances. In order to Jump a unit between two cities, both cities must have a Temporal Portal installed.

To Jump a unit, move the unit into a city with a Temporal Portal, then choose the order from the Orders menu, or press the "l" key. A menu of possible destinations appears. Choose the destination city from the menu, and the unit is instantly transported to that city. The unit becomes available for use on the following turn.

@@Moving Directly Between Worlds
Some units have the ability to move directly between two worlds. We change the border around their health bar to green whenever they can move between maps from the square they currently occupy. 

@@Trade Routes
Trade routes are established by moving a trade unit into a city at least ten squares from the unit's home city. You receive an immediate payment on the turn that the route is established. On each ensuing turn, the two cities each receive a trade bonus for as long as the trade route exists. The farther apart the two cities are, the more valuable the trade route. Trade routes established with cities of a rival civilization tend to be more profitable than those established between friendly cities. Each city may have up to three active trade routes at any time.

The value of a trade route is also affected by the type of goods traded. When trading a commodity that is demanded by the destination city, the trade route is much more profitable.

@@Transforming Terrain
In addition to the changes to Terrain that can be made through cultivation and refineries, advanced settler-type units are able to transform map squares into radically different Terrain types using the "Transform" command on the Orders menu. Terrain transformation is particularly useful if the Terrain surrounding a city doesn't produce sufficient resources.

See the Civilopedia entries for each Terrain type for the results of transformation.

@@Unit Prefix
Many units have a single letter prefix before their name. The letter indicates the initial of the only race that may build it. For example, 
B Old Man signifies that only the Buteos may build the Old Man unit. Units that may be built by more than one race or by no race are not given a prefix.

@@Unhappiness Due to Cities
Once you have built a certain number of cities, your citizens start to worry about your ability to effectively govern your civilization. When this occurs, additional unhappy citizens appear in each city.

The number of cities you can build before causing additional unhappiness is based on a number of factors, including game difficulty level and government type. The number of cities is higher for more advanced governments and lower levels of difficulty.

@@Veteran Units
During the American Civil War, soldiers who had never been in battle were said to have "seen the elephant" after being under fire for the first time. Afterward, they were considered veterans. History shows that well-trained, veteran soldiers are much more likely to survive a battle than inexperienced troops.

Units have a 50 percent chance of becoming Veterans each time they survive a combat encounter. Cities with certain Improvements automatically produce Veteran units of specific types, as do all cities under the influence of the Round Table Wonder. The attack and defense factors of Veteran units is increased by 50 percent.


@This must be here to terminate search!!!
