Darklord, a Civ2 Scenario by Carl Fritz
EMAIL: critz@angelfire.com 
HOMEPAGE: members.xoom.com/fambans/index.html

See readme.txt for installation instructions.

Description:
 Tolkien's War of the Rings is about to break out. All of the nations of
Middle Earth are involved: Gondor, Mordor, Rohan, Elves, Dwarves, Harad,
and Rhun. Can the Dark Lord and his allies be stopped? 
 The game is meant to be played as only as Mordor. Science in the game
simulates the Dark Lord's search for the Ring. When Mordor learns
"Whereabouts of the Ring", a halfling unit will be created which Mordor
must track down and destroy in order to recover the Ring. When the Ring
is recovered, Mordor will be able to build new units to help with the
conquest of Middle Earth.
 The scenario has lots of events. Some events bring characters onto the
stage, others generate consequences for taking cities and killing characters., 

Military Situation:
 Mordor is the most powerful nation and is allied with the Haradrim
and Easterlings. Mordor's allies aren't strong but will serve to tie
down Mordor's enemies elsewhere. The Witch King and the Nazgul are the most
powerful units that Mordor has, but they are air units that must return to
base each turn. Gondor and Rohan are the next most powerful nations.
Gondor will receive heros such as Gandalf and Aragorn during the game.
Rohan's cavalry is the best in Middle Earth. The Elves and Dwarves are
weaker than Gondor and Rohan because they don't have as many cities.

All units are listed in the Civilopedia, so I won't list unit stats here.

Diplomatic Situation:
 For Mordor, negotiation is only possible with the Haradrim and the
Easterlings. 

Science Situation:
 For Mordor, science represents the search for the Ring. There are 3 steps
in that search. When Whereabouts of the Ring is discovered by Mordor,
a halfling unit is created on the map, which Mordor must find and kill.
This will trigger more events which I won't detail here because it would 
spoil the game. The Elves will receive an Elf Lord each time they discover
one of the above three advances. There is no tech from conquest however.

Terrain:
 The terrain effects are mostly standard, except that there is 1 trade
arrow more than normal in grasslands and prairie. Railroads, airbases
and farmland are not possible. The mountain next to Barad Dur is Mount
Doom and generates 4 shields.

Wonders:
Wonders count as part of the scoring, so no new wonders are buildable.

NEW NAME (OLD NAME)			LOCATION (Owner)
Pyramids (Pyramids)     		Nurn (Mordorans)
Garden of Galadriel (Hanging Gardens)	Caras Galadhon (Elves)
Elven Havens (Colossus)			Dol Amroth (Gondorians)
Corsair's Havens (Lighthouse)		Umbar (Haradrim)
Glittering Caves (Oracle)		Helm's Deep (Rohirrim)
Witch King's Palace (Sun Tzu's)		Minas Morgul (Mordorans)
Forge of Orodruin (King Richard's)	Barad Dur (Mordorians)
Ithil Stone (Marco Polo's Embassy)	Barad Dur (Mordorians)
Arkenstone (Michelangelo's Chapel)	Erebor (Dwarves)
Palantir of Orthanc (Copernicus')	Isengard (Mordorians)
Cirdan's Shipyard (Magellan's Exp.)	Gray Havens (Elves)
Golden Hall of Meduseld (Shakespeare's) Edoras (Rohirrim)
Houses of Healing (J.S. Bach's)		Minas Tirith (Gondorians)
Crebain Spy Network (Isaac Newton's)	Dol Goldur (Mordorians)
Smaug's Treasure Hoard (Adam Smith's)	Erebor (Dwarves)
Black Stone (Statue of Liberty)		Erech (Gondorians)
Narya-Ring of Fire (Women's Suffrage)   Gray Havens (Elves)
Vilya-Ring of Sapphire (Hoover Dam)	Rivendell (Elves)
Dark Tower (Manhattan Project)		Barad Dur (Mordorians)
Nenya-Ring of Adamant (SETI)		Caras Galadhon (Elves)
Argonath (Cure for Cancer)		Anorien (Gondorians)

Credits:
Title graphic by Angus McBride with my text added. Most icons are
modifications of scenarios from the Fantastic Worlds CD or the All fantasy
compilation or Harland Thompson.

Bibliography:
For details about geography, wonders, events and characters, these sources
were consulted.
The Atlas of Middle Earth by Karen Wynn Fonstad
The Complete Guide to Middle-Earth World by Robert Foster
The Return of the King by J.R.R. Tolkien (the appendices)
The Tolkien Companion by J.E.A. Tyler